                                              Multi-Objective Exploration and Preference
                                                Optimization via Mutual Information

                                        Hongyan Xie1,2⋆ , Yikun Ban1 , Ruiyu Fang2 , Zixuang Huang1 , Deqing Wang1            ,
                                                              Jianxin Li1 , and Shuangyong Song2

                                                      School of Computer, Beihang University, Beijing, China
                                                       1

                                                     {xiehongyan,yikunb,huang_zx,dqwang}@buaa.edu.cn
                                        2
                                          Xingchen AGI Lab, China Telecom Artificial Intelligence Technology (Beijing) Co.,
arXiv:2607.01392v1 [cs.CL] 1 Jul 2026




                                                                      Ltd, Beijing, China
                                                              {fangry,songshy}@chinatelecom.cn



                                                Abstract. Aligning large language models with diverse and heteroge-
                                                neous human values requires multi-objective alignment methods to effec-
                                                tively trade off conflicting preference dimensions. Current methods achieve
                                                this trade-off by training policies conditioned on preference vectors and
                                                leveraging online direct preference optimization. However, exploration
                                                uncertainty can cause the reward distributions of responses generated
                                                under different preference vectors to overlap, and the generated responses
                                                may fail to effectively align with the corresponding preference vectors. In
                                                this paper, we propose Multi-Objective Exploration and Preference Op-
                                                timization via Mutual Information (MI-EPO), an information-theoretic
                                                framework. It unifies multi-objective exploration and alignment by max-
                                                imizing the joint conditional mutual information among generated re-
                                                sponses, preference feedback, and preference vectors. By incorporating a
                                                probabilistic routing mechanism, MI-EPO naturally decomposes objective
                                                alignment and preference-aware exploration, encouraging the model to
                                                generate responses that are distinguishable and aligned with different
                                                preference conditions. Experiments on safe alignment and helpful assistant
                                                tasks show that MI-EPO significantly improves the alignment between
                                                generated responses and preference vectors, makes the outputs more
                                                controllable, and achieves stable trade-offs across multiple objectives.

                                                Keywords: Large Language Models · Multi-Objective Alignment · On-
                                                line Direct Preference Optimization · Mutual Information


                                        1     Introduction

                                        Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [Ouyang et al.(2022)Ouyang, Wu, Jiang, Almeida, Wain
                                        successfully aligns large language models (LLMs) [He et al.(2024)He, Wang, Liu, Liu, Yao, Huang, Li, Li, Che, Z
                                        with human values using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [Schulman et al.(2017)Schulman, Wolski, Dhariwa
                                        However, most existing methods assume homogenized human values [Bakker et al.(2022)Bakker, Chadwick, Shea
                                        compressing diverse values into a single scalar reward. In reality, human values
                                        ⋆
                                            Work completed during an internship at Xingchen AGI Lab.
2      H. Xie et al.

are heterogeneous and multi-dimensional, and often require trade-offs across
multiple potentially conflicting preference dimensions, such as helpfulness and
harmlessness.
    Recent research in language model alignment has increasingly moved from
single-objective alignment to Multi-Objective Alignment (MOA). Some early
methods extend RLHF to Multi-Objective RLHF (MORLHF) [Rame et al.(2023)Rame, Couairon, Dancette, Ga
where human feedback is decomposed into multiple preference dimensions and sep-
arate proxy reward models are trained for each objective. The language model pol-
icy is then optimized using PPO [Schulman et al.(2017)Schulman, Wolski, Dhariwal, Radford, and Klimov],
with reward weights adjusted to trade off different preference objectives. However,
PPO training suffers from instability and high computational cost [Kumar et al.(2020)Kumar, Gupta, and Levine
Motivated by the superior efficiency and stability of Direct Preference Optimiza-
tion (DPO) [Rafailov et al.(2023)Rafailov, Sharma, Mitchell, Manning, Ermon, and Finn],
recent studies [Zhou et al.(2024)Zhou, Liu, Shao, Yue, Yang, Ouyang, and Qiao,Li et al.(2025a)Li, Zhang, Wan
have explored multi-objective alignment within the DPO framework. However,
these methods still require training and maintaining multiple separate models.
    Recently, several works [Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen,Yang et al.(2024a)Ya
leverage the instruction-following capability of LLMs by conditioning the policy
on preference vectors or expected reward values. While such offline methods sig-
nificantly reduce training cost, they rely on static preference datasets, which intro-
duces distribution shift between the policy that generated the data and the policy
being optimized [Xu et al.(2024)Xu, Fu, Gao, Ye, Liu, Mei, Wang, Yu, and Wu,Xiong et al.(2024b)Xiong, Don
To address this limitation, recent work extends Online AI Feedback (OAIF) to the
multi-objective setting and proposes Multi-Objective Online Direct Preference Op-
timization (MO-ODPO) [Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan, Li, Phatale, and Rastogi].
By conditioning the policy on preference vectors, MO-ODPO is able to generate
responses according to different preference vectors and combines the optimization
stability of DPO with the exploration capability of online feedback, allowing
effective trade-offs across multiple objectives. However, we found that even the
currently best-performing MO-ODPO method exhibits substantial reward fluctu-
ations in responses generated under the same preference conditions. Moreover,
the reward distributions of responses under different preference conditions show
significant overlap, as illustrated in Figure 1a. This phenomenon suggests that the
inherent exploration uncertainty during online generation weakens the conditional
control of the preference vectors W over the generated responses Y , resulting in
a pronounced misalignment between them.
    In this paper, we propose Multi-Objective Exploration and Preference Op-
timization via Mutual Information (MI-EPO), which unifies exploration and
multi-objective alignment from an information-theoretic perspective by maxi-
mizing the joint conditional mutual information I(Y ; CZ , W, Z | X) to train a
policy that generates responses conditioned on given preference vectors. Specifi-
cally, we formulate multi-objective alignment as maximizing the joint conditional
mutual information I(Y ; CZ , W, Z | X), where CZ is the feedback of the ob-
jective selected through a probabilistic routing variable Z. By the chain rule
of mutual information, this objective naturally decomposes into two comple-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MI-EPO                                        3

                        w1 = [0.2,0.8]          w2 = [0.5,0.5]           w3 = [0.8,0.2]                                              Baseline: High Uncertainty & Overlapping                                                                Ours: Reduced Uncertainty & High Diversity
                                                                                                                             6                                                                                                       6
                2                                                                                                                                                    Pareto Front                                                                                             Pareto Front
                                                                                                                                                                     Optimal for Preference                                                                                   Optimal for Preference
                                                                                                                             5                                       w1 (Harmless-focused)                                           5                                        w1 (Harmless-focused)




                                                                                          Objective 2 (e.g., Harmlessness)




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Objective 2 (e.g., Harmlessness)
                1                                                                                                                                                    w2 (Balanced)                                                                                            w2 (Balanced)
 Harmlessness

                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                     w3 (Helpful-focused)                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w3 (Helpful-focused)
                0




                                                                                                                                                                        Par




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Par
                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                       3
                1




                                                                                                                                                                           eto




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eto
                                                                                                                                                                             Fro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fro
                                                                                                                                                                              nt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nt
                                                                                                                             2                                                                                                       2
                2
            0.5                                                          0         1                                         1                                                                                                       1
Density




                                                                             Density
            0.0                                                                                                              0                                                                                                       0
                    3       2       1     0      1      2        3   4                                                           0    1        2         3          4            5            6                                          0     1        2         3          4            5            6
                                         Helpfulness                                                                                       Objective 1 (e.g., Helpfulness)                                                                          Objective 1 (e.g., Helpfulness)


                (a) Reward distribution                                                                                                                (b) Exploration Uncertainty

Fig. 1: (a) Reward distributions of responses generated under different preference
vectors during the test phase by the baseline method MO-ODPO. (b) The baseline
method MO-ODPO exhibits high exploration uncertainty during training, causing
the exploration regions under different preference conditions to heavily overlap.
In contrast, our method reduces exploration uncertainty, making the exploration
regions corresponding to different preference conditions more distinguishable
while maintaining overall diversity.


mentary terms: I(Y ; CZ | X, W, Z) and I(Y ; W | X). The former promotes
objective-specific preference alignment, while the latter encourages preference-
aware exploration, enabling the policy to generate distinguishable responses under
different preference conditions (Figure 1b). The source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/jyxhyan/MI-EPO.
    Our contributions are summarized as follows:
                – We unify multi-objective alignment and exploration by maximizing the joint
                  mutual information I(Y ; CZ , W, Z | X).
                – We introduce a mutual information objective between responses and prefer-
                  ence vectors, mitigating homogenized outputs under varying preferences and
                  misalignment between generated responses and preference vectors.
                – We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through both theoretical
                  analysis and empirical experiments.


2                         Preliminary
DPO. DPO is an offline preference optimization paradigm that circumvents
the need for explicit reward modeling and reinforcement learning. By exploit-
ing the closed-form optimal policy of a KL-constrained RL objective, DPO
reparameterizes the reward function r(x, y) as:
                                                                                                                                          πθ (y|x)
                                                                     r(x, y) = β log                                                                 + β log Z(x),                                                                                                                             (1)
                                                                                                                                          πref (y|x)
where πθ is the parameterized policy, πref is the reference policy, and Z(x) is the
partition function.Given a preference dataset D = {(xi , yi+ , yi− )}N
                                                                     i=1 , where y
                                                                                   +
4       H. Xie et al.

is preferred over y− , DPO models pairwise preferences using the Bradley–Terry
(BT) model. The preference probability is expressed as P (y+ ≻ y− | x) =
σ(r(x, y+ ) − r(x, y− )). Since the partition function Z(x) cancels out in the
reward difference, the DPO objective can be simplified to a binary cross-entropy
loss:
                                           πθ (y+ |x)          πθ (y− |x)
                                                                           
                   +   −
    LDPO (πθ ; x, y , y ) = − log σ β log              − β log                . (2)
                                          πref (y+ |x)         πref (y− |x)
This formulation allows for direct policy optimization using standard supervised
learning techniques, improving training stability and computational efficiency.

Mutual Information Maximization. Let X denote the input prompt, Y the gen-
erated response, and C ∈ {0, 1} a binary variable indicating human preference,
where c = 1 denotes a preferred response and c = 0 a dispreferred one. The Condi-
tional Mutual Information (CMI) [Ma et al.(2021)Ma, Tsai, Liang, Zhao, Zhang, Salakhutdinov, and Morency]
quantifies the expected shared information between Y and C given X. Condi-
tioning on X isolates the relationship between the generation and its preference
score by treating the prompt as a known constant. As direct computation of
CMI is generally intractable, it is bounded from below by the InfoNCE objective
[Tsai et al.(2022)Tsai, Li, Ma, Zhao, Zhang, Morency, and Salakhutdinov]:
                                                          
  I(Y ; C|X) := Ex∼X DKL PY,C|X=x ∥ PY |X=x PC|X=x
                                    "                                         #
                                                    exp(f (y, c))
              ≥ InfoNCE := sup E log                   Pm                       , (3)
                              f         exp(f (y, c)) + j=1 exp(f (yj , cj ))

where Positive pairs (y, c) ∼ PY,C|X , negative pairs (yj , cj ) ∼ PY |X PC|X , and
f denotes a score function. Given a prompt distribution p(x) and a policy πθ ,
a prompt x ∼ p(x), a positive pair (y + , c) ∼ πθ (y, c = 1 | x), and a negative
pair (y − , c) ∼ πref (y | x) p(c | x) are sampled. Utilizing a parameterized critic
function fϕ , the InfoNCE objective with preference feedback simplifies to a
pairwise contrastive loss:
                                                  exp(fϕ (y+ , c = 1))
      LInfoNCE (ϕ; y+ , y− ) = − log                                              .   (4)
                                       exp(fϕ (y , c = 1)) + exp(fϕ (y− , c = 0))
                                                +


When fϕ (x, y) = β log ππref
                          θ (y|x)
                             (y|x) , the InfoNCE objective reduces to Equation 2.


3     Method
In this section, we introduce the Multi-Objective Exploration and Preference
Optimization via Mutual Information.

3.1    Motivations and Problem Formulation
We train a prompt-conditioned controllable generation policy πθ (y | x, w), where
the preference vector w ∈ RK is incorporated as part of the policy input. Each
                                                                                  MI-EPO        5

objective k is associated with a reward model Rk (x, y) that produces an objective-
specific scalar reward sk . The preference vector w = [w1 , . . . , wK ]⊤ lies on the
                                    PK
probability simplex ∆K−1 = { w | k=1 wk = 1, wk ≥ 0 }, where wk represents
the relative importance assigned to the k-th objective during generation.
    Online multi-objective alignment is typically formulated as a sequential pro-
cedure. A single prompt x is sampled from a dataset D, and a preference vector
w is sampled from the simplex ∆K−1 to condition the prompt. Two candidate
responses, y1 and y2 , are generated from the current policy πθ (· | x, w). For each
objective k, the candidate response with the higher reward score is designated as
the preferred response y+,k , and the other as the non-preferred y−,k . We define
an objective-specific preference tuple (x, y+,k , y−,k ) for each objective k. To find
a Pareto optimal solution, the multi-objective optimization (MOO) is scalarized
into a weighted sum:

            K
            X                                                          K
                                                                       X
                                           +,k        −,k
                                                            
      min         wk LDPO πθ ; (x, w), y         ,y             s.t.         wk = 1, wk ≥ 0.   (5)
       θ
            k=1                                                        k=1

where wk denotes the k-th component of the sampled vector w.

Definition 1. A solution θ∗ is Pareto optimal if there exists no other solution
that is at least as good in all objectives and strictly better in at least one.

    However, the online exploration process based on policy sampling faces signifi-
cant challenges. Although the Pareto frontier defines the ideal trade-off boundary
among objectives, the inherent exploration uncertainty during online generation
weakens the conditional control of the preference Vectors W over the generated
responses Y , leading to severe misalignment between them. This issue manifests
in two aspects: (1) the generated responses may deviate from the intended pref-
erence vectors; and (2) responses generated under different preference conditions
may substantially overlap in the reward distributions.
    To address these challenges, we unify multi-objective exploration and align-
ment from an information-theoretic perspective. Let X, Y , and W denote the
prompt, the policy-sampled response, and the conditional preference vector, re-
spectively. For each objective k, let Ck ∈ {0, 1} denote its preference feedback
signal. As these signals are typically produced independently by different reward
models, we follow the standard multi-objective evaluation setting and assume
that the feedback variables {Ck }Kk=1 are conditionally independent given (X, Y ).
To model how preference vectors select among objectives, we adopt a probabilistic
objective routing formulation. We introduce an auxiliary variable Z ∈ {1, . . . , K}
determined by the preference vector such that P (Z = k | W ) = wk . The variable
Z indicates the objective emphasized by the current response. Let CZ denote the
feedback associated with the routed objective. The overall alignment objective
can then be expressed as maximizing the joint conditional mutual information
I(Y ; CZ , W, Z | X). Applying the chain rule of mutual information, and recogniz-
ing that Z is conditionally independent of Y given W (i.e., I(Y ; Z | X, W ) = 0),
6      H. Xie et al.

we can exactly decompose the objective:
          J(θ) = I(Y ; CZ , W, Z | X)
                = I(Y ; W | X) + I(Y ; Z | X, W ) + I(Y ; CZ | X, W, Z)
                = I(Y ; W | X) + Ez∼P (Z|W ) [I(Y ; Cz | X, W, Z = z)]
                                      K
                                      X
                = I(Y ; W | X) +            wk I(Y ; Ck | X, W ),               (6)
                                      k=1
                              K
                              X
          max J(θ)     s.t.         wk = 1, wk ≥ 0.                             (7)
           θ
                              k=1

where maximizing the conditional mutual information I(Y ; Ck | X, W ) enables
objective-specific preference alignment, while maximizing I(Y ; W | X) reduces
exploration uncertainty and encourages responses aligned with preference vectors,
yielding distinguishable and diverse outputs across preferences.

Information-theoretic interpretation. We next provide an information-theoretic in-
terpretation of the proposed objective, highlighting its implications for preference
identifiability and structured exploration.
    The term I(Y ; W | X) measures how much information the generated response
Y preserves about the preference vector W . Using the identity I(Y ; W | X) =
H(W | X) − H(W | Y, X), we see that, under a fixed prior entropy H(W | X),
maximizing this term reduces the posterior uncertainty H(W | Y, X). This
implies that the generation process becomes more informative with respect to
preference conditions, improving identifiability and reducing ambiguity across
different preference-induced behaviors.
    To understand the effect on exploration, consider the marginal entropy of the
policy distribution H(Y | X) induced by the preference prior P (W ). Using the
standard mutual information decomposition, H(Y | X) = I(Y ; W | X) + H(Y |
W, X), we observe that I(Y ; W | X) provides a structural lower bound on
the marginal entropy up to the conditional entropy term. Therefore, increasing
I(Y ; W | X) encourages higher diversity in Y while maintaining consistency
conditioned on W . This results in a partitioned exploration space where different
preference vectors induce distinguishable yet diverse generation modes.
    Together, these effects motivate our design, which jointly promotes preference
alignment and structured exploration within a unified information-theoretic
framework.

3.2   Maximizing I(Y ; Ck | X, W ) for Preference Alignment
Prior work [Xiao et al.(2025)Xiao, Ge, Sanghavi, Wang, Katz-Samuels, Versage, Cui, and Chilimbi]
demonstrated that under the Bradley–Terry (BT) model assumption, the ob-
jective of DPO can be interpreted as maximizing the conditional mutual in-
formation between the response Y and the preference feedback Ck , where In-
foNCE [Oord et al.(2018)Oord, Li, and Vinyals] serves as the variational estima-
tor. Therefore, for each objective k, we adopt DPO to maximize I(Y ; Ck | X, W ),
                                                                       MI-EPO          7

which encourages the policy to generate responses that align with the objective-
specific preference feedback. The resulting objective can be formulated as follows:
                                        πθ (y+,k |x, w+ )           πθ (y−,k |x, w+ )
                                                                                      
LYC (πθ ; y+,k , y−,k ) = −log σ βc log                     −βc log                      ,
                                        πref (y+,k |x, w+ )         πref (y−,k |x, w+ )
                                                                                     (8)
where w+ denotes the preference vector used for sampling y+,k and y−,k .

3.3   Maximizing I(Y ; W | X) for Reducing Exploration Uncertainty
To maximize the CMI I(Y ; W | X), we derive a tractable lower bound based on
the InfoNCE framework:
                                                              
        I(Y ; W | X) := Ex∼X DKL PY,W |X=x ∥ PY |X=x PW |X=x
                            "                                      #
                                           exp(g(y, w))
                     ≥ sup E log               Pm                    ,    (9)
                        g        exp(g(y, w)) + j=1 exp(g(y, wj ))

where g represents a score function. In this formulation, the positive pair (y, w) ∼
PY,W |X=x is drawn from the conditional joint distribution, indicating that the
response y satisfies the specified preference condition w. Conversely, the m
negative pairs (y, wj ) ∼ PY |X=x PW |X=x , representing cases where the response
y is not aligned with the preference vector wj . Given a prompt distribution p(x)
and a policy πθ , a prompt x ∼ p(x), a positive pair (y, w+ ) ∼ πθ (y | x, w+ ) are
sampled. To form the negative pair, we reuse the same response y and pair it
with an independently drawn condition w− ∼ p(w | x). The InfoNCE loss under
the conditional preference vector is defined as follows:
                                                exp(gϕ (y, w+ ))
          LYW (ϕ; w+ , w− ) = − log                                        .        (10)
                                       exp(gϕ (y, w+ )) + exp(gϕ (y, w− ))
    To instantiate the parametric critic function gϕ , the implicit reward parameteri-
zation is adopted [Rafailov et al.(2023)Rafailov, Sharma, Mitchell, Manning, Ermon, and Finn].
Specifically, gϕ (y, w) is defined as follows:
                                                πθ (y|x, w)
                           gϕ (y, w) = βw log                 ,                     (11)
                                                πref (y|x, w)
Substituting this parameterization into Equation 11 yields the following InfoNCE
loss function:
                                        πθ (y|x, w+ )            πθ (y|x, w− )
                                                                                
  LYW (πθ ; w+ , w− ) = − log σ βw log                 − β w log                   ,
                                       πref (y|x, w+ )           πref (y|x, w− )
                                                                                 (12)

3.4   Multi-Objective Exploration and Preference Optimization via
      Mutual Information
Based on the joint mutual information decomposition formula proposed in Sec-
tion 3.1, we scalarize and integrate the preference alignment loss LY C with the
8      H. Xie et al.

exploration enhancement loss LY W . The final MI-EPO loss function is defined
as follows:
            K
            X                                    1 X
LMI-EPO =         wk LYC (πθ ; y+,k , y−,k ) +         LYW (πθ ; w+ , w− )
                                                 2 1 2
            k=1                                   y∈y ,y
               K
                               πθ (y |x, w+ )
                                           +,k
                                                           πθ (y−,k |x, w+ )
               X                                                              
       =−     wk log σ βc log                     − βc log
                              πref (y+,k |x, w+ )          πref (y−,k |x, w+ )
          k=1
                                      πθ (y|x, w+ )               πθ (y|x, w− )
                                                                               
          1 X
        −           log σ βw sg log                     − βw log
          2    1  2
                                     πref (y|x, w+ )              πref (y|x, w− )
               y∈y ,y
               K
               X
        s.t.         wk = 1, wk ≥ 0,                                           (13)
               k=1

where the stop-gradient operator sg(·) ensures that the gradient of LYW only
flows through the counterfactual condition w− , preventing overfitting to the
self-generated response y. Since LYW is independent of preference feedback, both
y1 and y2 generated under w+ can serve as valid anchors.


3.5   Implementation

Algorithm 1 presents the procedure of our proposed MI-EPO, with detailed steps
provided below: (1) We sample preference vectors w+ and w− from a Dirichlet
distribution defined over the probability simplex, where the concentration param-
eters α control the sparsity and balance of the sampled weights. Subsequently,
we define a prompt-construction function to formalize the integration of the user
prompt x with a preference vector w:

       G(x, w) = Human:{x} ⊕ RN1 {w1 } . . . RNK {wK } ⊕ Assistant:,

where RNk denotes textual tokens representing the k-th preference dimension, and
⊕ indicates sequence concatenation. (2) Given the current policy, we sample two
responses y1 and y2 . Each response is evaluated independently on K objectives.
We compare the two responses along each objective k and label the response with
the higher score as the preferred response y+,k , while treating the other as the
non-preferred response y−,k . (3) Subsequently, we compute the loss according to
Equation 13 and update the policy parameters accordingly.


4     Experiments

We evaluate the performance of our MI-EPO on two widely studied multi-objective
alignment (MOA) tasks: safety alignment and helpful assistant alignment. These
tasks involve multiple distinct and potentially competing objectives.
                                                                     MI-EPO          9

Algorithm 1 MI-EPO for Online Multi-Objective Alignment
Require: initial policy πθ0 ; reward models {Rk }K
                                                 k=1 ; training dataset D; Num training
    epochs N
 1: for n := 1 to N do
 2:   for each prompt x ∈ D do
 3:      Sample preference vectors w+ , w− ∼ Dirichlet(α)
 4:      Sample two candidate responses y1 , y2 ∼ πθn−1 (· | G(x, w+ ))
 5:      for k = 1 to K do
 6:        Compute the reward scores s1,k and s2,k for (x, y1 ) and (x, y2 ) using the
           reward model Rk
 7:        The response with the higher score is denoted as y+,k , while the other is
           denoted as y−,k
 8:      end for
 9:      Compute the loss via Equation 13 and update the policy parameters via
         gradient descent
10:   end for
11: end for



4.1   Safety Alignment

Data and Training Setup. Multi-objective alignment aims to achieve effective
trade-offs across multiple preference dimensions, enabling models to satisfy diverse
user preferences. In this section, we focus on the safety alignment task, which in-
volves two key alignment dimensions: helpfulness and harmlessness. To study this
problem, we adopt the PKU-SafeRLHF-10K dataset [Ji et al.(2023)Ji, Liu, Dai, Pan, Zhang, Bian, Chen, Sun, W
which provides preference annotations for both helpfulness and harmlessness on
each question–answer pair. We randomly split the dataset into two subsets: 8K
samples for training and the remaining 2K for testing. In this experiment, we de-
fine two special tokens, RN1 and RN2 , corresponding to the strings helpfulness
and harmlessness, respectively. For the backbone language model, we use Alpaca-
7B. Following [Lin et al.(2025a)Lin, Jiang, Xu, Chen, and Chen], we employ two
open-source reward models as evaluation oracles to score each response along the
helpfulness and harmlessness dimensions. The open-source reward models and
datasets are publicly accessible, as detailed in Appendix A. Additional details on
training procedures and hyperparameter settings are reported in Appendix B.

Evaluation. We evaluate performance by examining the Pareto fronts produced
by different methods, specifically through the average normalized test reward
curves. In addition, we employ three multi-objective metrics to evaluate the per-
formance of different methods: (1) Hypervolume (HV) [Zitzler and Thiele(1998)],
which measures the volume of the non-dominated region in the objective space;
larger HV indicates better diversity and convergence; (2) Mean Inner Product
(MIP) [Lin et al.(2025a)Lin, Jiang, Xu, Chen, and Chen], which computes the
average inner product between the preference vector and the reward vector,
measuring how well generated solutions align with user preferences. Larger MIP
indicates better alignment. (3) Conditional Reward Dispersion (CRD), which
  10                     H. Xie et al.

                                                                                              w1 = [0.2,0.8]           w2 = [0.5,0.5]       w3 = [0.8,0.2]
                                                                                       MO-ODPO                                             Ours
                                                                               2                                             2
               1.0
                                                                               1                                             1




                                                                Harmlessness
                                                                               0                                             0
Harmlessness


               0.5
                                                                               1                                             1
                        Base Model                                             2                                             2
               0.0      RS
                        RiC                                               0.5                                      0    1                                        0.0     2.5
                                                                                                                            0.5




                                                               Density
                        MO-ODPO                                                                                                                                    Density
                        Our Method
               0.50.8                                                     0.0                                               0.0
                          0.3        0.2     0.7   1.2   1.7                       2     0         2           4                   2      0         2        4
                                     Helpfulness                                       Helpfulness                                      Helpfulness

                     (a) Pareto fronts                                                           (b) Reward distribution

  Fig. 2: (a) Pareto front curves produced by MI-EPO and baseline methods on
  the safety alignment task. (b) Reward distributions of MI-EPO and the baseline
  method MO-ODPO on the safety alignment task


 computes the average determinant of the covariance matrix of reward vectors
 under each preference condition, measuring the intra-condition dispersion of ob-
 tained rewards. Smaller CRD indicates more stable conditional control. Further
 details regarding these metrics and the evaluation procedure can be found in
 Appendix C.

Baselines. The proposed MI-EPO is compared with the following methods: (1) Re-
warded Soups (RS) [Rame et al.(2023)Rame, Couairon, Dancette, Gaya, Shukor, Soulier, and Cord],
which fine-tunes k base models and merges them into a single model in the
parameter space according to the given preference vector w during inference;
(2) RiC [Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen], which
conditions the policy model on multiple contextual rewards and applies supervised
fine-tuning for alignment; (3) MO-ODPO [Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan, Li, Phatale, and Rastogi],
a multi-objective online DPO algorithm that aligns a single policy with diverse
and potentially conflicting preferences via preference-conditioned prompts.



 Table 1: Performance comparison on the Safety Alignment task using HV, MIP,
 and CRD metrics. Metrics with ↑ indicate that larger values are better, and
 metrics with ↓ indicate that smaller values are better.

                                                                                                                                                                               HV↑ MIP↑ CRD↓
        RS [Rame et al.(2023)Rame, Couairon, Dancette, Gaya, Shukor, Soulier, and Cord] 1.19                                                                                       0.43   0.64
        RiC [Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen]                1.13                                                                                       0.58   0.89
        MO-ODPO [Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan, Li, Phatale, and Rastogi]           1.54                                                                                       0.82   0.62
        MI-EPO                                                                          2.70                                                                                       1.01   0.29
                                                                  MI-EPO        11

Results. Figure 2a presents the empirical Pareto fronts achieved by MI-EPO and
the baseline methods. Each point represents the average multi-objective reward
on the test set under a specific preference condition. Compared to the baselines,
MI-EPO produces Pareto fronts that cover a larger area. We compare the reward
distributions of the baseline method MO-ODPO and our proposed method under
different preference vectors w. As shown in Figure 2b, for MO-ODPO, the reward
distributions corresponding to different preference vectors exhibit substantial
overlap. In contrast, the reward distributions generated by our method are
more distinctly separated in the space. Notably, in the marginal distributions,
when the preference vector emphasizes a specific dimension, the corresponding
reward distribution shows a clear positive shift, providing strong evidence for the
effectiveness of our method in multi-objective alignment tasks. Furthermore, our
method substantially reduces the variance of reward distributions under each
preference condition, effectively suppressing uncertainty in the generation process
and enabling effective trade-offs among different objectives.
    Table 1 reports quantitative evaluation results using HV, MIP, and CRD.
MI-EPO consistently outperforms all baselines across all metrics. Specifically,
compared with the currently best-performing baseline method, MO-ODPO, MI-
EPO achieves a 68.8% improvement in HV, indicating broader coverage and
higher diversity of the solution set; a 23.2% improvement in MIP, showing that
the generated responses follow the specified preference vectors more closely; and a
53.2% reduction in CRD indicates decreased variance of rewards under the same
preference condition, resulting in more stable conditional control. Moreover, when
βw = 0, MI-EPO is equivalent to MO-ODPO. These results collectively confirm
that MI-EPO effectively mitigates cross-objective interference while achieving
robust and balanced multi-objective trade-offs.


4.2   Helpful Assistant

Data and Training Setup. In this section, we conduct an empirical evaluation of
the helpful assistant task across three objectives: helpfulness, harmlessness, and hu-
mor. We use the HH-RLHF dataset [Bai et al.(2022)Bai, Jones, Ndousse, Askell, Chen, DasSarma, Drain, Fort, G
and adopt Qwen3-8B as the backbone language model. From approximately 160K
multi-turn dialogues, 8K are randomly selected to form the training set, while
2K randomly sampled dialogues are used for testing during inference. In this
experiment, we define three special tokens, RN1 , RN2 , and RN3 , corresponding to
the strings helpfulness, harmlessness, and humor, respectively. Three indepen-
dent, open-source reward models serve as evaluation oracles, providing an average
score for each objective dimension. Detailed descriptions of the experimental
setup and hyperparameters are provided in Appendices D and E.


Baselines and Evaluation. We compare the proposed MI-EPO with the same
baseline methods used in the safety alignment task. The evaluation procedure
can be found in Appendix C.
  12                    H. Xie et al.

                                                                                                 w1 = [0.2,0.8]         w2 = [0.5,0.5]       w3 = [0.8,0.2]
                                                                                          MO-ODPO                                           Ours

               1.4                           Base Model                           2                                         2
                                             RS




                                                                   Harmlessness
                                             RiC
               1.0                           MO-ODPO                              0                                         0
Harmlessness


                                             Our Method
               0.6                                                                2                                         2

               0.2                                                                                                0.00 0.25                                   0.00 0.25




                                                                Density
                                                                          0.25                                           0.25                                    Density
               0.21.0                                                     0.00                                           0.00
                         0.5       0.0       0.5          1.0                         2        0           2                         2        0           2
                               Helpfulness                                                Helpfulness                                    Helpfulness

                     (a) Pareto fronts                                                            (b) Reward distribution

  Fig. 3: (a) Pareto front curves produced by MI-EPO and baseline methods
  on the helpful assistant task. (b) Reward distributions of MI-EPO and the
  baseline MO-ODPO on the helpful assistant task. All methods are trained on
  the Qwen3-8B-Base model.


 Table 2: Performance comparison on the Helpful Assistant task across different
 objectives. Metrics with ↑ indicate that larger values are better, and metrics with
 ↓ indicate that smaller values are better.

                     (a) Helpfulness and Harmlessness                                      (b) Helpfulness, Harmlessness, and Humor

                                                                                              Method                                                                       HV↑ MIP↑ CRD↓
               RS [Rame et al.(2023)Rame, Couairon, Dancette,
                                                       RS [RameGaya,
                                                                  et al.(2023)Rame,
                                                                      Shukor, Soulier,Couairon,
                                                                                        and Cord]
                                                                                                Dancette,
                                                                                                    0.68 Gaya,
                                                                                                            0.21 Shukor,
                                                                                                                    0.58 Soulier, a
               RiC [Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu,
                                                       RiC Zhong,
                                                           [Yang etYu,
                                                                     al.(2024b)Yang,
                                                                        and Chen]      Pan, Luo, Qiu,
                                                                                                    0.46
                                                                                                      Zhong,0.07
                                                                                                               Yu, and
                                                                                                                    1.05Chen]
               MO-ODPO [Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan,
                                                       MO-ODPO
                                                             Li, Phatale,
                                                                   [Guptaandet al.(2025)Gupta,
                                                                                Rastogi]       Sullivan,
                                                                                                    1.68 Li,0.64
                                                                                                             Phatale,
                                                                                                                    0.57
                                                                                                                      and Rastogi]
               MI-EPO                                  MI-EPO                                       1.98 0.68 0.52



  Results. We evaluate the ability of different methods to balance harmlessness
  and helpfulness in multi-turn dialogues. As shown in Figure 3a, the Pareto front
  generated by MI-EPO covers a broader region in the objective space. Furthermore,
  as illustrated in Figure 3b, MI-EPO produces reward distributions under different
  preference vectors that are more distinctly separated than those of the currently
  best-performing method, MO-ODPO, thereby enabling finer-grained preference
  control. In single-preference conditions, the variance of the reward distribution
  is also lower, which enhances the stability of conditional control and reduces
  uncertainty during the sampling process. These observations are consistent with
  the quantitative results reported in Table 2a. Overall, these results indicate that
  MI-EPO enables the policy model to more effectively trade off among multiple
  objectives.

  Scaling to Three Objectives. To evaluate the effectiveness of our method in higher-
  dimensional preference spaces, we consider a Helpful Assistant task with three
  independent objectives: Helpfulness, Harmlessness, and Humor. As illustrated in
  Figure 4a, we dynamically adjust the preference vectors of both MI-EPO and the
                                                                                                  MI-EPO                     13

                                                                                   R1(Harmlessness)                RLHF:R1
                                                          Base Model                                               RLHF:R2
                                                          RS                                                       RLHF:R3
                                                          RiC                                                      RS
                                                          MO-ODPO                                                  RiC
          1.0                                             Our Method
                                                                                                                   MO-ODPO
              0.5                                                                                                  Our Method
Helpfulness




              0.0
                                                                                           -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
              -0.5
              -1.0
                 -0.5
                                                                       R2(Humor)                           R3(Helpfulness)
                         0.0                                    0.0
                        Hum                            0.5
                            or 0.5               1.0 lessness
                                     1.0   1.5    Harm

(a) The learned Pareto frontier in three-                              (b) Optimal results of multi-objective
dimensional space.                                                     algorithms under different preferences.

Fig. 4: Results for the Helpful Assistant task with three-objective alignment using
normalized harmlessness, helpfulness, and humor rewards.


baseline methods during inference. Under these varying preference conditions, our
method achieves a superior Pareto frontier. In Figure 4b we compare MI-EPO
with baseline methods in terms of the optimal performance achievable along each
preference dimension, as well as RLHF trained on individual rewards. The results
demonstrate that MI-EPO achieves a balanced and competitive performance
across all dimensions, whereas the other methods exhibit suboptimal performance
in at least one preference dimension.
    The quantitative results presented in Table 2b corroborate these observations.
Among the baselines, RS performs relatively well on CRD but shows weaker
performance on the other metrics. This behavior stems from its parameter-
interpolation strategy: by interpolating model parameters, RS fixes model weights
corresponding to specific preferences, thereby avoiding the amplification of re-
ward variance that instruction-based methods may experience due to limited
conditional-following capability. However, its linear combination of parameters
constrains the model’s ability to capture nonlinear representations, making it
difficult to approximate the Pareto-optimal. Notably, as the number of aligned
objectives increases, the advantages of our mutual information-driven framework
become more pronounced. Compared with the currently best-performing baseline
method, MO-ODPO, MI-EPO achieves an impressive relative improvement of
87.2% in HV and a 29.6% gain in MIP, while maintaining highly competitive
CRD scores.


5                    Related Work
Multi-Objective Alignment. Human preferences are inherently multi-dimensional
and sometimes conflicting, encompassing aspects such as helpfulness, harmlessness,
and humor [Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen], and
14     H. Xie et al.

recent studies further reveal Pareto-optimal trade-offs among these objectives
[Agnihotri et al.(2025)Agnihotri, Jain, Ramachandran, and Wen]. Effectively align-
ing large language models (LLMs) with such diverse preference dimensions there-
fore remains a critical challenge. Conventional multi-objective alignment methods
[Zhou et al.(2024)Zhou, Liu, Shao, Yue, Yang, Ouyang, and Qiao,Xu et al.(2025)Xu, Tong, Zhang, Zhou, and
typically rely on linearly combining multiple reward models and retraining the
LLM for each preference configuration, which incurs substantial computational
cost. To alleviate this burden, some methods train specialized models for in-
dividual preference dimensions and integrate them at inference time via parameter
merging [Rame et al.(2023)Rame, Couairon, Dancette, Gaya, Shukor, Soulier, and Cord],
logit aggregation [Shi et al.(2024)Shi, Chen, Hu, Liu, Hajishirzi, Smith, and Du],
or ensemble-based refinement [Li et al.(2025b)Li, Zhang, Wang, Shi, Liu, Feng, and Chua].
Nevertheless, these methods still require maintaining multiple models, leading to
considerable storage and inference overhead. To address this limitation, alternative
strategies [Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen,Yang et al.(2024a)Yang, Liu, Xie, Hu
leverage the instruction-following capability of LLMs by incorporating preference
vectors or desired preference scores into the prompt to train a single policy model.
Among these, MO-ODPO [Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan, Li, Phatale, and Rastogi]
combines the optimization stability of DPO with the exploratory power of online
reinforcement learning to achieve effective trade-offs across multiple objectives, but
it may still generate responses that are poorly aligned with the preference vectors.
Recently, UniARM [Xie et al.(2026)Xie, Ban, Fang, Huang, Wang, Li, Yao, Wang, and Song]
proposes a unified autoregressive reward model that jointly models multiple prefer-
ence dimensions, enabling flexible test-time alignment without requiring separate
reward models for each objective. In this work, we focus on reducing uncertainty
during the exploration process, ensuring that sampled responses better align with
the preference vectors and thereby achieve improved multi-objective trade-offs.

Multi-Objective Optimization. Multi-objective optimization aims to identify opti-
mal solutions in the presence of multiple, potentially conflicting objectives. Exist-
ing methods can be broadly categorized into three types: approaches that focus on
identifying a single optimal solution [Ye et al.(2021)Ye, Lin, Yue, Guo, Xiao, and Zhang,Lin et al.(2024)Lin, Zh
approaches that aim to obtain a finite set of optimal solutions [Lin et al.(2025b)Lin, Liu, Zhang, Liu, Wang, and
and approaches that approximate the entire Pareto front, which may be infinite
[Dimitriadis et al.(2025)Dimitriadis, Frossard, and Fleuret,Chen and Kwok(2024)].
Of particular relevance to this study are the latter approaches, which model
the complete Pareto set within a single model, enabling flexible selection of
optimal solutions according to diverse user preferences without retraining. These
methods have been widely applied in deep learning, including Bayesian opti-
mization [Lin et al.(2022)Lin, Yang, Zhang, and Zhang], reinforcement learning
[Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan, Li, Phatale, and Rastogi], and model merg-
ing [Chen and Kwok(2025)]. In this paper, we propose MI-EPO, an online rein-
forcement learning framework for multi-objective alignment that reduces explo-
ration uncertainty. Different from prior contrastive learning methods [Li et al.(2022)Li, Yu, Song, Wang, Zou, an
that leverage mutual information maximization for representation learning, we
employ it as a mechanism for preference-conditioned policy optimization. By
                                                                   MI-EPO        15

maximizing the mutual information between generated responses and condi-
tioning preference vectors, MI-EPOpromotes more distinguishable exploration
trajectories across different preference conditions, leading to improved preference
alignment while preserving the diversity of the Pareto frontier and achieving
better multi-objective trade-offs.


6   Conclusion

In this paper, we propose Multi-Objective Exploration and Preference Opti-
mization via Mutual Information (MI-EPO), an information-theoretic framework
that unifies multi-objective exploration and alignment. MI-EPO maximizes the
joint conditional mutual information among generated responses, preference feed-
back, and preference vectors. By doing so, it achieves objective-level preference
alignment while guiding the model toward preference-aware exploration, which
reduces uncertainty in the generation process. Empirical evaluations on safety
alignment and helpful assistant tasks demonstrate that MI-EPO achieves strong
performance across multiple metrics, including HV, MIP, and CRD.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (No. 62276015 and No. 62506024) and GW2025-09.

Disclosure of Interests. The authors have no competing interests to declare that are
relevant to the content of this article.


References

Agnihotri et al.(2025)Agnihotri, Jain, Ramachandran, and Wen. Agnihotri, A., Jain,
    R., Ramachandran, D., Wen, Z.: Multi-objective preference optimization: Improving
    human alignment of generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10892 (2025)
Bai et al.(2022)Bai, Jones, Ndousse, Askell, Chen, DasSarma, Drain, Fort, Ganguli, Henighan et al..
    Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K., Askell, A., Chen, A., DasSarma, N., Drain, D.,
    Fort, S., Ganguli, D., Henighan, T., et al.: Training a helpful and harmless assistant
    with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862
    (2022)
Bakker et al.(2022)Bakker, Chadwick, Sheahan, Tessler, Campbell-Gillingham, Balaguer, McAleese, Glaese, Aslanides,
    Bakker, M., Chadwick, M., Sheahan, H., Tessler, M., Campbell-Gillingham,
    L., Balaguer, J., McAleese, N., Glaese, A., Aslanides, J., Botvinick, M., et al.:
    Fine-tuning language models to find agreement among humans with diverse
    preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems 35, 38176–38189
    (2022)
Chen and Kwok(2024). Chen, W., Kwok, J.: Efficient Pareto manifold learning with
    low-rank structure. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (2024)
Chen and Kwok(2025). Chen, W., Kwok, J.: Pareto merging: Multi-objective optimiza-
    tion for preference-aware model merging. In: Forty-second International Conference
    on Machine Learning (2025)
16      H. Xie et al.

Dimitriadis et al.(2025)Dimitriadis, Frossard, and Fleuret. Dimitriadis, N., Frossard,
     P., Fleuret, F.: Pareto low-rank adapters: Efficient multi-task learning with prefer-
     ences. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2025)
Gupta et al.(2025)Gupta, Sullivan, Li, Phatale, and Rastogi. Gupta, R., Sullivan, R.,
     Li, Y., Phatale, S., Rastogi, A.: Robust multi-objective preference alignment with
     online dpo. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
     27321–27329 (2025)
He et al.(2024)He, Wang, Liu, Liu, Yao, Huang, Li, Li, Che, Zhang et al.. He,            Z.,
     Wang, Z., Liu, X., Liu, S., Yao, Y., Huang, Y., Li, X., Li, Y., Che, Z., Zhang, Z.,
     et al.: Telechat technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.03804 (2024)
Hu et al.(2022)Hu, Shen, Wallis, Allen-Zhu, Li, Wang, Wang, and Chen. Hu,              E.J.,
     Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W.: LoRA:
     Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In: International Conference on
     Learning Representations (2022)
Huang et al.(2026)Huang, Xia, Ren, Zheng, Xiao, Xie, Huaqiu, Liang, Dai, Zhuang et al..
     Huang, Z., Xia, X., Ren, Y., Zheng, J., Xiao, X., Xie, H., Huaqiu, L., Liang, S.,
     Dai, Z., Zhuang, F., et al.: Real-time aligned reward model beyond semantics.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.22664 (2026)
Ji et al.(2024)Ji, Hong, Zhang, Chen, Dai, Zheng, Qiu, Li, and Yang. Ji, J., Hong, D.,
     Zhang, B., Chen, B., Dai, J., Zheng, B., Qiu, T., Li, B., Yang, Y.: PKU-SafeRLHF:
     Towards multi-level safety alignment for LLMs with human preference. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2406.15513 (2024)
Ji et al.(2023)Ji, Liu, Dai, Pan, Zhang, Bian, Chen, Sun, Wang, and Yang. Ji, J., Liu,
     M., Dai, J., Pan, X., Zhang, C., Bian, C., Chen, B., Sun, R., Wang, Y., Yang,
     Y.: Beavertails: Towards improved safety alignment of llm via a human-preference
     dataset. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 24678–24704
    (2023)
Kumar et al.(2020)Kumar, Gupta, and Levine. Kumar, A., Gupta, A., Levine, S.: Dis-
     cor: Corrective feedback in reinforcement learning via distribution correction. Ad-
     vances in neural information processing systems 33, 18560–18572 (2020)
Li et al.(2022)Li, Yu, Song, Wang, Zou, and He. Li, C., Yu, X., Song, S., Wang, J.,
     Zou, B., He, X.: Simctc: A simple contrast learning method of text clustering
    (student abstract). In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
     pp. 12997–12998 (2022)
Li et al.(2020)Li, Zhang, and Wang. Li, K., Zhang, T., Wang, R.: Deep reinforcement
     learning for multiobjective optimization. IEEE transactions on cybernetics 51(6),
     3103–3114 (2020)
Li et al.(2025a)Li, Zhang, Wang, Shi, Liu, Feng, and Chua. Li, M., Zhang, Y., Wang,
     W., Shi, W., Liu, Z., Feng, F., Chua, T.S.: Self-improvement towards pareto
     optimality: Mitigating preference conflicts in multi-objective alignment. In: Findings
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 11010–11031
    (2025a)
Li et al.(2025b)Li, Zhang, Wang, Shi, Liu, Feng, and Chua. Li, M., Zhang, Y., Wang,
     W., Shi, W., Liu, Z., Feng, F., Chua, T.S.: Self-improvement towards Pareto opti-
     mality: Mitigating preference conflicts in multi-objective alignment. In: Che, W.,
     Nabende, J., Shutova, E., Pilehvar, M.T. (eds.) Findings of the Association for Com-
     putational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 11010–11031, Association for Computational
     Linguistics, Vienna, Austria (Jul 2025b)
Lin et al.(2025a)Lin, Jiang, Xu, Chen, and Chen. Lin, B., Jiang, W., Xu, Y., Chen,
     H., Chen, Y.C.: PARM: Multi-objective test-time alignment via preference-aware
                                                                 MI-EPO       17

    autoregressive reward model. In: Forty-second International Conference on Machine
    Learning (2025a)
Lin et al.(2025b)Lin, Liu, Zhang, Liu, Wang, and Zhang. Lin, X., Liu, Y., Zhang, X.,
    Liu, F., Wang, Z., Zhang, Q.: Few for many: Tchebycheff set scalarization for many-
    objective optimization. In: International Conference on Learning Representations
    (2025b)
Lin et al.(2022)Lin, Yang, Zhang, and Zhang. Lin, X., Yang, Z., Zhang, X., Zhang, Q.:
    Pareto set learning for expensive multi-objective optimization. In: Conference on
    Neural Information Processing Systems (2022)
Lin et al.(2024)Lin, Zhang, Yang, Liu, Wang, and Zhang. Lin, X., Zhang, X., Yang, Z.,
    Liu, F., Wang, Z., Zhang, Q.: Smooth tchebycheff scalarization for multi-objective
    optimization. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (2024)
Ma et al.(2021)Ma, Tsai, Liang, Zhao, Zhang, Salakhutdinov, and Morency. Ma,
    M.Q., Tsai, Y.H.H., Liang, P.P., Zhao, H., Zhang, K., Salakhutdinov, R., Morency,
    L.P.: Conditional contrastive learning for improving fairness in self-supervised
    learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02866 (2021)
Oord et al.(2018)Oord, Li, and Vinyals. Oord, A.v.d., Li, Y., Vinyals, O.: Representa-
    tion learning with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748
    (2018)
Ouyang et al.(2022)Ouyang, Wu, Jiang, Almeida, Wainwright, Mishkin, Zhang, Agarwal, Slama, Ray et al..
    Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang,
    C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al.: Training language models to follow
    instructions with human feedback. In: Conference on Neural Information Processing
    Systems (2022)
Rafailov et al.(2023)Rafailov, Sharma, Mitchell, Manning, Ermon, and Finn.
    Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Manning, C.D., Ermon, S., Finn,
    C.: Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
    Advances in neural information processing systems 36, 53728–53741 (2023)
Rame et al.(2023)Rame, Couairon, Dancette, Gaya, Shukor, Soulier, and Cord.
    Rame, A., Couairon, G., Dancette, C., Gaya, J.B., Shukor, M., Soulier, L., Cord,
    M.: Rewarded soups: towards pareto-optimal alignment by interpolating weights
    fine-tuned on diverse rewards. In: Conference on Neural Information Processing
    Systems (2023)
Schulman et al.(2017)Schulman, Wolski, Dhariwal, Radford, and Klimov. Schulman,
    J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O.: Proximal policy optimization
    algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 (2017)
Shi et al.(2024)Shi, Chen, Hu, Liu, Hajishirzi, Smith, and Du. Shi, R., Chen, Y., Hu,
    Y., Liu, A., Hajishirzi, H., Smith, N.A., Du, S.S.: Decoding-time language model
    alignment with multiple objectives. In: Conference on Neural Information Processing
    Systems (2024)
Su et al.(2024)Su, Feng, Xie, Wu, Huang, He, Song, Fang, Huang, and Silamu. Su,
    H., Feng, S., Xie, H., Wu, D., Huang, H., He, Z., Song, S., Fang, R., Huang, X.,
    Silamu, W.: Domain-slot aware contrastive learning for improved dialogue state
    tracking. In: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
    Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 12521–12525, IEEE (2024)
Tsai et al.(2022)Tsai, Li, Ma, Zhao, Zhang, Morency, and Salakhutdinov. Tsai,
    Y.H.H., Li, T., Ma, M.Q., Zhao, H., Zhang, K., Morency, L.P., Salakhutdi-
    nov, R.: Conditional contrastive learning with kernel. In: International Conference
    on Learning Representations (2022)
18      H. Xie et al.

Wang et al.(2024a)Wang, Lin, Xiong, Yang, Diao, Qiu, Zhao, and Zhang. Wang, H.,
    Lin, Y., Xiong, W., Yang, R., Diao, S., Qiu, S., Zhao, H., Zhang, T.: Arithmetic
    control of LLMs for diverse user preferences: Directional preference alignment with
    multi-objective rewards. In: Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
    Linguistics (2024a)
Wang et al.(2025)Wang, Liu, Yao, Wang, Zhao, Yang, Deng, Jia, Peng, Huang et al..
    Wang, Z., Liu, X., Yao, Y., Wang, C., Zhao, Y., Yang, Z., Deng, W., Jia, K., Peng,
    J., Huang, Y., et al.: Technical report of telechat2, telechat2. 5 and t1. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2507.18013 (2025)
Wang et al.(2024b)Wang, Yao, Mengxiang, He, Wang, Song et al.. Wang, Z., Yao, Y.,
    Mengxiang, L., He, Z., Wang, C., Song, S., et al.: Telechat: An open-source billingual
    large language model. In: Proceedings of the 10th SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese
    Language Processing (SIGHAN-10), pp. 10–20 (2024b)
Xiao et al.(2025)Xiao, Ge, Sanghavi, Wang, Katz-Samuels, Versage, Cui, and Chilimbi.
    Xiao, T., Ge, Z., Sanghavi, S., Wang, T., Katz-Samuels, J., Versage, M., Cui, Q.,
    Chilimbi, T.: Infopo: On mutual information maximization for large language
    model alignment. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the
    Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
    Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11699–11711 (2025)
Xie et al.(2026)Xie, Ban, Fang, Huang, Wang, Li, Yao, Wang, and Song. Xie,             H.,
    Ban, Y., Fang, R., Huang, Z., Wang, D., Li, J., Yao, Y., Wang, C., Song, S.:
    Uniarm: Towards a unified autoregressive reward model for multi-objective
    test-time alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09538 (2026)
Xiong et al.(2024a)Xiong, Zhao, Zhang, Mengxiang, He, Li, and Song. Xiong,              S.,
    Zhao, Y., Zhang, J., Mengxiang, L., He, Z., Li, X., Song, S.: Dual prompt tuning
    based contrastive learning for hierarchical text classification. In: Findings of the
    Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, pp. 12146–12158 (2024a)
Xiong et al.(2024b)Xiong, Dong, Ye, Wang, Zhong, Ji, Jiang, and Zhang. Xiong, W.,
    Dong, H., Ye, C., Wang, Z., Zhong, H., Ji, H., Jiang, N., Zhang, T.: Iterative
    preference learning from human feedback: bridging theory and practice for rlhf un-
    der kl-constraint. In: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
    Learning, pp. 54715–54754 (2024b)
Xu et al.(2024)Xu, Fu, Gao, Ye, Liu, Mei, Wang, Yu, and Wu. Xu, S., Fu, W., Gao,
    J., Ye, W., Liu, W., Mei, Z., Wang, G., Yu, C., Wu, Y.: Is dpo superior to ppo for
    llm alignment? a comprehensive study. In: Proceedings of the 41st International
    Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 54983–54998 (2024)
Xu et al.(2025)Xu, Tong, Zhang, Zhou, and Wang. Xu, Z., Tong, Y., Zhang, X., Zhou,
    J., Wang, X.: Reward consistency: Improving multi-objective alignment from a
    data-centric perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11337 (2025)
Yang et al.(2024a)Yang, Liu, Xie, Huang, Zhang, and Ananiadou. Yang, K., Liu, Z.,
    Xie, Q., Huang, J., Zhang, T., Ananiadou, S.: Metaaligner: Towards generalizable
    multi-objective alignment of language models. In: Conference on Neural Information
    Processing Systems (2024a)
Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen. Yang, R., Pan, X.,
    Luo, F., Qiu, S., Zhong, H., Yu, D., Chen, J.: Rewards-in-context: Multi-objective
    alignment of foundation models with dynamic preference adjustment. In: Interna-
    tional Conference on Machine Learning (2024b)
Ye et al.(2021)Ye, Lin, Yue, Guo, Xiao, and Zhang. Ye, F., Lin, B., Yue, Z., Guo, P.,
    Xiao, Q., Zhang, Y.: Multi-objective meta learning. In: Conference on Neural
    Information Processing Systems (2021)
                                                                           MI-EPO          19

Zhou et al.(2024)Zhou, Liu, Shao, Yue, Yang, Ouyang, and Qiao. Zhou, Z., Liu, J.,
    Shao, J., Yue, X., Yang, C., Ouyang, W., Qiao, Y.: Beyond one-preference-fits-all
    alignment: Multi-objective direct preference optimization. In: Findings of Annual
    Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2024)
Zitzler and Thiele(1998). Zitzler, E., Thiele, L.: Multiobjective optimization using
    evolutionary algorithms—a comparative case study. In: International Conference
    on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature (1998)


A      Sources of Datasets and Models
We provide a detailed introduction to the datasets used in this paper:
 – PKU-SafeRLHF-10K [Ji et al.(2023)Ji, Liu, Dai, Pan, Zhang, Bian, Chen, Sun, Wang, and Yang],
   which contains 10k samples with safety preferences. The dataset includes
   constraints in more than ten dimensions, such as insults, immoral, crime,
   emotional harm, privacy, and others. They are designed for fine-grained
   constraint value alignment in RLHF technology
 – HH-RLHF [Bai et al.(2022)Bai, Jones, Ndousse, Askell, Chen, DasSarma, Drain, Fort, Ganguli, Henighan
   comprises two parts: a helpfulness dataset and a harmlessness (red-teaming)
   dataset, with approximately 160k annotated samples in total. The helpfulness
   portion is constructed by engaging crowdworkers in open-ended conversations
   with models and selecting the responses deemed more helpful, thereby steering
   the dialogue toward more beneficial directions. In contrast, the harmlessness
   portion is collected by prompting models to generate potentially harmful
   responses and selecting those deemed more harmful, thereby steering the
   dialogue toward harmful directions.
   In Table 3, we provide the sources of datasets and models used in our
experiments.



       Table 3: Sources of datasets and models used in our experiments.
                                                                                           Safety Alignment
Dataset              PKU-SafeRLHF-10K [Ji et al.(2023)Ji, Liu, Dai, Pan, Zhang, Bian, Chen, Sun, Wang, and Yang,Ji et al.(2024)Ji,
Base Models                                                                                    Alpaca-7B
Oracle Reward Models                                                                   Helpfulness; Harmlessness




B    Implementation Details
Table 4 summarizes the hyper-parameter settings used in our experiments. All
models are based on a Transformer architecture implemented with the TRL frame-
work and are trained on NVIDIA Tesla A100 GPUs with 40 GB memory. We adopt
bfloat16 (bf16) precision for training and apply LoRA [Hu et al.(2022)Hu, Shen, Wallis, Allen-Zhu, Li, Wang, W
for parameter-efficient fine-tuning, with rank r = 64, scaling factor α = 128,
20        H. Xie et al.

and a dropout rate of 0.05. The Adam optimizer is used together with a cosine
learning rate scheduler, a warm-up ratio of 0.1, and a batch size of 64. During
generation and evaluation, the maximum number of inference tokens is set to
128.
    The training process consists of two stages. In the supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) stage, models are trained for three epochs. The initial learning rate is
set to 1 × 10−6 for the safety alignment setting and 2 × 10−5 for the help-
ful assistant setting. For safety alignment, we adopt a smaller learning rate
since the base model has already been fine-tuned on the corresponding dataset,
and the subsequent training mainly aims to adapt the model to prompts with
weights provided as additional inputs. In the online alignment stage, models
are further fine-tuned for two epochs, with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−4
for safety alignment and 4 × 10−5 for helpful assistant. The KL divergence
coefficients, βc and βw , are set to 0.1 and 0.01, respectively. Since the reward
models for different preference dimensions have varying scales, we first com-
pute the mean and variance of each dimension’s rewards on the offline data,
and then normalize the rewards during the online stage. For baseline reproduc-
tion, we follow the official codebase and experimental settings provided by the
[Yang et al.(2024b)Yang, Pan, Luo, Qiu, Zhong, Yu, and Chen].



                   Table 4: hyper-parameter settings of the experiments.
                                              Common Hyper-parameter Settings
                       Architecture                                                Transformer, Trl
                        Hardware                                                  NVIDIA Tesla A100
                Quantization for training                                                bf16
                   Fine-tuning strategy              LoRA [Hu et al.(2022)Hu, Shen, Wallis, Allen-Zhu, Li, Wang, Wang, and Chen]
                         LoRA r                                                           64
                       LoRA alpha                                                        128
                      LoRA dropout                                                       0.05
                        Optimizer                                                       Adam
                 Learning rate scheduler                                               Cosine
                      Warm up ratio                                                       0.1
                        Batch size                                                        64
     Inference tokens for generation, and evaluation                                     128
          dirichlet concentration parameters α                  0.5 for Safety Alignment and 1.0 for Helpful Assistant
                                                            SFT Stage
                   Finetuning epochs                                                    3
                  Initial learning rate                  1 × 10−6 for Safety Alignment and 2 × 10−5 for Helpful Assistant
                                                           Online Stage
               Online finetuning epochs                  2 for the two-objective setting and 3 for the three-objective setting
                 Initial learning rate                    1 × 10−4 for Safety Alignment and 4 × 10−5 for Helpful Assistant
                           βc                                                             0.1
                           βw                                                             0.01




C     Details of Evaluation Metrics

We employ three multi-objective optimization metrics for quantitative evaluations:
hypervolume (HV) [Zitzler and Thiele(1998)], mean inner product (MIP) [Lin et al.(2025a)Lin, Jiang, Xu, Chen
and conditional reward dispersion(CRD).
                                                                   MI-EPO        21

HV. Let u ∈ Rk denote a solution’s objective vector, A = {u1 , . . . , uN } a set of
such vectors, and z a reference point. The hypervolume of A with respect to z is
defined as                                              
                     HVz (A) = Λ v ∃u ∈ A : u ⪯ v ⪯ z ,

where Λ(·) denotes the Lebesgue measure.
    HV quantifies the volume of objective space dominated by A relative to
z, capturing both convergence toward the Pareto front and diversity across
objectives. A larger HV indicates better overall performance in terms of both
quality and coverage.

MIP. MIP is a metric used to evaluate the alignment between response and
user preferences. Let wi ∈ RK denote the user preference vector associated with
the i-th sample, and si ∈ RK denote the corresponding model response reward
vector. MIP is defined as
                                           N
                                       1 X ⊤
                               MIP =        w si ,                             (14)
                                       N i=1 i

where N is the total number of samples.
    Intuitively, MIP measures the alignment between the model’s responses and
the user’s preferences, with higher values indicating better conformity. In multi-
objective alignment scenarios, each dimension of the preference vector represents
a distinct preference aspect, so MIP effectively captures the model’s performance
across different preference dimensions.

CRD. To evaluate the stability of the policy under a fixed preference condition,
we measure the dispersion of the obtained multi-objective rewards within each
condition. Specifically, let s ∈ Rk denote the reward vector corresponding to a
generated response. For a given preference condition w, we collect the evaluation
vectors of all generated responses and compute the covariance matrix:

                                Σw = Cov(s | w).                               (15)

   We then define the Conditional Reward Dispersion as the determinant of the
covariance matrix:

                                D(w) = det(Σw ).                               (16)

    The determinant of the covariance matrix, also known as the generalized
variance, reflects the joint dispersion of the reward distribution. Geometrically,
it corresponds to the volume (area in the two-dimensional case) of the reward
distribution ellipse.
    A smaller value of D(w) indicates that the generated responses yield more
concentrated reward outcomes under the given preference condition, suggesting
that the policy exhibits more stable and consistent conditional control. Conversely,
22       H. Xie et al.

a larger value implies higher variability in reward outcomes, indicating weaker
control over the target preference.
    In our evaluation, we compute this quantity for each preference condition and
report the average value across all conditions:
                                           1 X
                                CRD =          det(Σw ).                                    (17)
                                          |W|
                                                w∈W

     Lower values of CRD indicate better conditional stability.

Evaluation Procedure We evaluate all methods on the test dataset using preference
vectors. In the two-preference-dimension experiment, we select a set of discretized
and evenly spaced preference vectors on the 2D probability simplex: [0.0, 1.0],
[0.1, 0.9], [0.2, 0.8], [0.3, 0.7], [0.4, 0.6], [0.5, 0.5], [0.6, 0.4], [0.7, 0.3], [0.8, 0.2],
[0.9, 0.1], [1.0, 0.0]. In the three-preference-dimension experiment, we select the
following representative preference vectors on the 3D probability simplex: [0.0,
0.0, 1.0], [0.0, 1.0, 0.0], [0.1, 0.1, 0.8], [0.1, 0.8, 0.1], [0.2, 0.2, 0.6], [0.2, 0.4, 0.4],
[0.2, 0.6, 0.2], [0.33, 0.33, 0.33], [0.4, 0.2, 0.4], [0.4, 0.4, 0.2], [0.6, 0.2, 0.2], [0.8, 0.1,
0.1], [1.0, 0.0, 0.0], covering different regions of the trade-off space. Using these
preference vectors produces a set of solutions and the corresponding discrete
Pareto front for each method. In all evaluations, the rewards are normalized.
