                                                                          ART for Diffusion Sampling:
                                                     Continuous-Time Control and Actor–Critic Learning

                                                                Yilie Huang∗              Wenpin Tang†                   Xun Yu Zhou‡

                                                                                             July 3, 2026
arXiv:2607.02137v1 [cs.LG] 2 Jul 2026




                                                                                               Abstract

                                                 We study timestep allocation for score-based diffusion sampling, where a learned reverse-time dynam-
                                              ics is discretized on a finite grid. Uniform and hand-crafted schedules are standard choices, but they rely
                                              on ad hoc, fixed prescriptions and can therefore be suboptimal. To address this limitation, we propose
                                              Adaptive Reparameterized Time (ART), a continuous-time control formulation that learns a time change
                                              by treating the speed of the sampling clock as the control, so that a uniform grid on the learned clock
                                              induces adaptive timesteps in the original diffusion time. Based on a leading-order Euler error surrogate,
                                              ART provides a principled objective for allocating timesteps along the sampling trajectory. To solve this
                                              potentially high-dimensional deterministic control problem, we introduce ART-RL, an auxiliary random-
                                              ized formulation with Gaussian policies that turns schedule learning into a continuous-time reinforcement
                                              learning problem. We prove that ART-RL is equivalent to ART at optimality, in the sense that the mean
                                              of the former’s optimal Gaussian policy is optimal for the latter. We further establish policy evaluation
                                              and policy improvement characterizations and derive trajectory-based moment identities that yield im-
                                              plementable actor–critic updates for solving ART-RL. We conduct experiments ranging from controlled
                                              low-dimensional settings to image generation, and show that ART-learned schedules, when plugged into
                                              existing diffusion samplers by changing only the timestep grid, consistently improve sample quality over
                                              strong baseline schedules at matched budgets. The learned schedules also exhibit broad generalizability
                                              with superior performances, transferring without retraining across sampling budgets, datasets, solvers,
                                              pipelines, and representation spaces.


                                                 Key words: generative AI, diffusion model, sampling, adaptive reparameterized time, optimal control,
                                              reinforcement learning, distillation, transfer learning
                                          ∗ Department   of   Applied   Mathematics,   The    Hong       Kong   Polytechnic   University,   Hong   Kong.    Email:
                                        yilie.huang@polyu.edu.hk.
                                           † Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. Email:

                                        wt2319@columbia.edu.
                                           ‡ Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research and Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New

                                        York, NY 10027, USA. Email: xz2574@columbia.edu.




                                                                                                     1
1     Introduction
    Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song and Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021b) generate samples by
transforming noise into data, thereby producing draws from a target distribution learned from examples.
They now underpin a broad range of modern generative systems, including text-to-image models such as
DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), text-to-video generators such
as Sora (OpenAI, 2024), Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2023) and Veo (Google, 2024) and, more recently,
diffusion-based large language models such as Mercury (Khanna et al., 2025) and LLaDA (Nie et al., 2025).
    A diffusion pipeline typically separates training from sampling: the score or denoising model is learned
during pretraining, and inference generates samples by running a reverse-time dynamics with a numerical
discretization. This paper focuses on the sampling stage, where one must choose a finite set of timesteps
to discretize the learned reverse-time process. Because each step requires evaluating the learned model, the
choice of time grids directly dictates how a fixed computational budget is spent and can substantially affect
both efficiency and sample quality. Most existing approaches adopt uniform grids or hand-crafted schedules
(Song et al., 2021a,b; Karras et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023a; Lu et al., 2022), but these choices are rarely
derived from a principled optimization framework. Our goal is to provide a control-theoretic framework and
approach that treat timestep selection as a systematic design problem for diffusion sampling.
    The main contributions of this paper are summarized below:

    • Methodology: We formulate timestep allocation for diffusion sampling as a continuous-time optimal
      control problem, termed Adaptive Reparameterized Time (ART). ART introduces a time change called
      the sampling clock and models the local progression in diffusion time as a controllable rate, which real-
      locates function evaluations along the reverse sampling trajectory while respecting a fixed overall time
      budget. To solve the resulting control problem, which is inherently in high-dimensional state spaces in
      most applications including image generation, we develop ART-RL, a continuous-time reinforcement
      learning (CTRL) approach that learns this rate via randomized, Gaussian policies and actor–critic
      iterations, leveraging recent theoretical advances in CTRL (Wang et al., 2020; Jia and Zhou, 2022a,b).

    • Theory: We establish a rigorous link between ART and its randomized counterpart ART-RL. First,
      we show that the auxiliary randomized formulation is not merely a relaxation: it aligns with the
      original deterministic ART objective in that the mean of the optimal ART-RL Gaussian policy solves
      the ART control problem. Second, we develop continuous-time actor–critic theory specialized to time
      reparameterization, including characterizations of policy evaluation and policy improvement that yield
      explicit, implementable update rules. These results lead to moment conditions for both the critic and
      the actor and provide improvement guarantees that underpin the resulting learning algorithm for the
      optimal time schedule.

    • Experiments: We evaluate ART across low- and high-dimensional settings, multiple numerical solvers,
      sampling pipelines, representation spaces, and a broad range of sampling budgets. In controlled ex-


                                                      2
     periments with an analytical score model, in MNIST with a deliberately small score network, and in
     the standard EDM pipeline for CIFAR–10, ART consistently improves over Uniform, DPM, and EDM
     schedules at matched evaluation budgets, including the largest budgets where the hand-designed EDM
     schedule is the strongest. See a quick overview of these empirical gains in Figure 3. All comparisons
     keep the trained score model, network backbone, solver, and sampling protocol fixed; so the gains are
     purely from our choice of timestep allocation. This makes ART a principled schedule-learning method
     rather than an ad hoc one tied to a particular architecture, sampler, or diffusion pipeline.

   • Transfer/Generalization: Our experiments show that the schedule trained on CIFAR–10 under a given
     number of time step budget transfers directly, without retraining, across timestep counts, datasets,
     sampling pipelines, and representation spaces. It outperforms the benchmarks not only on AFHQv2,
     FFHQ, and ImageNet–64 under the pixel-space EDM pipeline, but also on ImageNet–512 under EDM2
     which simultaneously involves a modern backbone and sampling pipeline, a latent-space representation,
     and high-resolution image generation. These results demonstrate that ART-RL learns a reusable
     timestep schedule rather than a dataset-specific tuning artifact; its one-time training cost can therefore
     be amortized beyond the particular dataset, solver, and pipeline on which it is learned.

   To our best knowledge, this is the first work that develops a control theory based framework for learning
timestep schedules in generative diffusion sampling, providing a theoretically grounded alternative to the
existing fixed heuristic grids. The proposed ART-RL method is purely data-driven and learns a reusable
schedule that improves both direct sampling performance and transfer performance.

Relevant literature: Diffusion models were first developed in discrete time, including DDPM (Ho et al.,
2020) and DDIM (Song et al., 2021a). The continuous-time viewpoint of Song et al. (2021b) recasts diffusion
modeling through a stochastic differential equation (SDE) formulation, unifying and extending earlier discrete
constructions. On the inference side, many samplers can be interpreted as numerical methods for the learned
reverse-time dynamics, including the predictor-corrector scheme of Song et al. (2021b), exponential-integrator
style approaches (Zhang and Chen, 2023), and higher-order solvers (Zhang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024).
In addition, convergence analyses for diffusion inference under uniform or hand-crafted discretizations are
studied in Lee et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2023a,b); Li et al. (2024); Benton et al. (2024); Li and Yan (2024);
Huang et al. (2025a).
   Continuous-time reinforcement learning (CTRL) was introduced and formulated by Wang et al. (2020)
as entropy-regularized stochastic control in continuous time and spaces, where exploration is represented
by relaxed (randomized) controls, formalizing the trial-and-error mechanism central to reinforcement learn-
ing. Following Wang et al. (2020), a sequence of works have built a model-free theory for CTRL through
martingale-based analyses (Jia and Zhou, 2022a,b, 2023; Tang and Zhou, 2024), complemented by explicit
performance guarantees (Huang et al., 2024, 2025b; Huang and Zhou, 2025). A related study also investi-
gates policy optimization in the continuous-time setting (Zhao et al., 2023). CTRL theory has been applied


                                                      3
to financial portfolio selection (Huang et al., 2024; ?) and fine-tuning generative AI diffusion models (Gao
et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024, 2025). In particular, ? exploit the special structure of the Merton problem
with power utility and introduce a family of Gaussian policies without considering entropy regularization.
They then prove the mean of the optimal Gaussian policy solves the original problem. This idea indeed
inspires the formulation of ART-RL in this paper, even though the application domain and problem setting
are very different here.

Organization of the paper: Section 2 reviews score-based diffusion and probability flow ODE sampling.
Section 3 introduces ART as a time-reparameterization control formulation. Section 4 presents ART-RL
as a randomized auxiliary problem, with a provable connection to ART. Section 5 develops the theory
and an actor–critic algorithm for solving ART-RL, including policy evaluation and policy improvement.
Section 6 reports the experimental results. Section 7 concludes. Additional numerical results are placed in
the appendix.



2     Revisiting Continuous-Time Score-Based Diffusion Models
    We briefly revisit continuous-time score-based diffusion models for generative AI (GenAI) along with
key notations; see Tang and Zhao (2025) for a detailed exposition. A diffusion model consists of a forward
diffusion process that progressively corrupts data with an unknown target distribution over a physical time
interval τ P r0, T s, driving the distribution toward a simple reference law (e.g. Gaussian), and a backward
generative process that transports samples from this reference back toward the original target distribution
(Figure 1).




Figure 1: Illustration of the forward noising process and the corresponding backward generative process in
a score-based diffusion model.


Forward diffusion.         The forward dynamics are given by the Itô SDE

                               ` ˘
                 d x̄pτ q “ ´ f τ x̄pτ q dτ ` gpτ q dwpτ q,   τ P r0, T s,   x̄p0q „ p0 P PpRd q,          (1)


where w “ twpτ q : τ P r0, T su is a standard Wiener process (Brownian motion) in Rd , f : r0, T s ˆ Rd Ñ Rd
and g : r0, T s Ñ R` are measurable coefficients, PpRd q denotes the set of Borel probability measures on Rd ,


                                                         4
and p0 is the unknown target distribution. Here d is usually a very large number in a typical task such as
image generation. Let pτ be the law of x̄pτ q and write its score function as Spτ, xq “ ∇x log pτ pxq. Under
standard well-posedness assumptions for common choices of pf, gq, the SDE (1) maps p0 along the family
tpτ uτ Pr0,T s toward a tractable reference distribution at time T .


Backward sampling         For sampling, one can work with the reverse-time diffusion or, equivalently, with a
deterministic probability flow ordinary differential equation (ODE) that shares the same marginals as the
reverse-time SDE. As shown by Tang and Zhao (2025, Theorem 5.1), the ODE and the reverse SDE yield
the same family tpτ u. Denoting the backward state by x̃pτ q :“ x̄pT ´ τ q with initialization x̃p0q „ pT and
using a trained score model Ŝpτ, xq in place of the unknown Spτ, xq, the implementable backward probability
flow ODE is

              dx̃pτ q    `     ˘        1 `     ˘2 `             ˘
                      “ f T ´ τ x̃pτ q ` g T ´ τ Ŝ T ´ τ, x̃pτ q ,      τ P r0, T s,    x̃p0q „ pT .          (2)
               dτ                       2

Euler discretization.      To generate samples, we numerically integrate (2) on a grid 0 “ τ0 ă τ1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă
τK “ T with step sizes hi “ τi`1 ´ τi , and denote x̃i :“ x̃pτi q. Using the explicit Euler method, we obtain

                        ” `      ˘          `      ˘2 `            ˘ı
        x̃i`1 “ x̃i ` hi f T ´ τi x̃i ` 21 g T ´ τi Ŝ T ´ τi , x̃i ,   i “ 0, . . . , K ´ 1,   x̃p0q „ pT .   (3)


A uniform grid τi “ iT {K is simple to implement and widely used, but such a single and naı̈ve global
step size cannot capture the inevitable variation in numerical characteristics along the trajectory. When K
is small, sampling is computationally efficient but discretization error can be significant. When K is large,
under a uniform grid the additional function evaluations are spread evenly rather than concentrated on where
dominant errors can be most effectively reduced, in which case a nontrivial fraction of the extra computation
is poorly utilized. Intuitively, early stages of the reverse process, where samples are close to noise, may
tolerate coarser resolution, whereas later stages typically benefit from finer steps. These considerations
motivate adaptive, data-driven time discretizations that redistribute steps under a fixed total time budget
T , allocating computation to where it has the greatest impact on accuracy and sample quality.



3     ART: Time Reparameterization as Control
    We now formulate adaptive timestep selection as a continuous-time control problem. The central idea is
to introduce a reparameterized sampling clock and to treat the progression of physical diffusion time as a
controlled process. By allowing the sampling trajectory to advance at variable speeds at different epochs, this
formulation strategically redistributes computational effort under a fixed total time budget. In this section,
we first describe the reparameterized dynamics induced by the time change, and subsequently introduce an
objective function that formalizes optimal timestep allocation.



                                                         5
Figure 2: ART as a time change between two clocks. The physical diffusion time τ (top) and the reparame-
terized time t (bottom) are linked by a continuous map τ “ ψptq with ψp0q “ 0 and ψpT q “ T . A uniform
                                                                             9
grid in t induces a generally nonuniform grid in τ , with local speed θptq “ ψptq controlling how function
evaluations are redistributed along the trajectory.

3.1    Time reparameterization and controlled dynamics

   Rather than evolving the reverse process on a fixed physical-time grid, we introduce a reparameterized
clock that governs how diffusion time is traversed during sampling. This auxiliary time variable decouples
numerical resolution from the original diffusion horizon and enables adaptive redistribution of function
evaluations. Specifically, let ψ : r0, T s Ñ R be a continuous mapping from the reparameterized time t to the
physical diffusion time τ , so that τ “ ψptq with ψp0q “ 0 and ψpT q “ T . Figure 2 depicts this correspondence
between the two clocks and the induced nonuniform physical-time grid.
   On the reparameterized clock, the reverse-time state is represented as xptq :“ x̃pψptqq with initialization
                                                                    9
xp0q „ pT . The time-change is characterized by the control θptq :“ ψptq, the instantaneous rate at which
diffusion time advances relative to the new clock. The boundary conditions on ψ translates into an integral
            şT
constraint 0 θptq dt “ ψpT q´ψp0q “ T , ensuring that the full diffusion horizon is traversed over the sampling
interval.
   Importantly, we do not restrict ψ to be monotone a priori, consequently allowing θptq to take either
sign. This modeling choice is deliberate: it yields a formulation that is closed under optimization and
avoids prematurely excluding admissible control trajectories that may arise when learning θ in a data-driven
manner. In particular, monotone time reparameterizations, corresponding to θptq ě 0 almost everywhere,
are naturally recovered as a special case without being hard-coded into the dynamics.
   If the reparameterized time is discretized uniformly as 0 “ t0 ă t1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă tK “ T , the resulting physical-
time grid is given by τi “ ψpti q, with step sizes that generally vary across i. From a numerical perspective,
the trajectory xp¨q evolves on the new clock, while the control θp¨q determines where progression in physical
diffusion time is accelerated or slowed down. This mechanism enables the sampler to allocate resolution
adaptively along the reverse trajectory, placing finer discretization where it is most beneficial. We refer to
this time-reparameterized sampling framework as Adaptive Reparameterized Time (ART).
   We now formulate the controlled dynamics under ART. Since the reparameterized state is defined by
xptq “ x̃pψptqq, the evolution of x on the new clock follows directly from the chain rule. Taking ψ as another




                                                       6
state variable and θ as the control variable, the state dynamics is

                                  $              `          ˘
                                  & xptq
                                    9    “ θptq F xptq, ψptq ,        xp0q „ pT ,                             (4a)
                                   9
                                  %ψptq “ θptq,        ψp0q “ 0, ψpT q “ T,                                   (4b)

where F is the backward probability-flow vector field evaluated at the physical time T ´ ψ, namely

                                           `     ˘   1 `     ˘2 `        ˘
                              F px, ψq :“ f T ´ ψ x ` g T ´ ψ Ŝ T ´ ψ, x ,                                    (5)
                                                     2

with f and g being the coefficients of the forward diffusion, and Ŝ a learned score function. The equation
(4b) simply records that ψ accumulates at rate θ; so θ can be interpreted as a local time-scaling factor under
the new clock. Moreover, we have the time budget constraint
                                                 żT
                                                      θptq dt “ T,                                             (6)
                                                  0


which formalizes that the sampler must allocate a total amount T of physical-time progression across the
interval t P r0, T s. This constraint underlines an important feature of ART: any local deceleration of the
dynamics, corresponding to smaller values of θptq and hence finer resolution in a given region, must be
compensated by acceleration elsewhere, implying that improvements in numerical accuracy are achieved not
by increasing the overall computational budget but by redistributing it along the trajectory in a strategic
manner.


3.2    Euler error surrogate and control objective

   To motivate the formulation of an appropriate objective for selecting the time-warping rate θ on the
t-clock, we quantify how the Euler discretization behaves under the controlled dynamics (4a). The basic
principle is that the leading-order one-step error is governed by the local stiffness indicator of the probability-
flow dynamics, and hence can be used as a proxy for where additional resolution is most valuable. We proceed
in the same spirit as the Euler discretization in (3), but now on a fixed, generic step rti , ti`1 q of the t-clock
with stepsize hi :“ ti`1 ´ ti , where the implementation uses a constant control value per step, denoted by θi .
   Let Ei denote the one-step Euler residual:

                                                ´                `              ˘¯
                                Ei :“ xpti`1 q ´ xpti q ` hi θi F xpti q, ψpti q .


A second-order Taylor expansion of the solution map around pxpti q, ψpti qq yields the local error

                                             h2i 2 `               ˘
                                      Ei “      θi Q xpti q, ψpti q ` Oph3i q,                                 (7)
                                             2




                                                         7
where the coefficient Q collects terms arising from differentiating the probability-flow field along the trajec-
tory. More explicitly,
               „                                                 ȷ„                                     ȷ
                           1                                                   1
    Qpx, ψq “ f pT ´ ψqId ` pgpT ´ ψqq2 ∇x ŜpT ´ ψ, xq                                   2
                                                                   f pT ´ ψqx ` pgpT ´ ψqq ŜpT ´ ψ, xq
                           2                                                   2
                                                                                                             (8)
                                                                1            B ŜpT ´ ψ, xq
                  ´ f pT ´ ψqx ´ gpT ´ ψqg pT ´ ψqŜpT ´ ψ, xq ´ pgpT ´ ψqq2
                     1                     1
                                                                                            .
                                                                2                  Bτ

Equation (7) shows that the second-order error (in the step size) of the Euler scheme is quadratic in θi ,
modulated by the term Qpx, ψq evaluated along the trajectory. This function Q captures local geometric
and model-induced stiffness of the probability-flow field, and the control θ determines how strongly this
stiffness ought to be felt on a given step. As a result, regions where |Qpx, ψq| is large are precisely where
aggressive time progression would amplify discretization error and hence one needs to proceed slowly by
taking a small θ, and vice versa.
    This motivates interpreting |Qpx, ψq| θptq2 as a local cost density that guides advancing time progression
based on Qpx, ψq adaptively. Together with the time budget constraint (6), we hence introduce the following
objective functional

                           ” ż T`                               ˘        ˇ                   ı
              θ
            J ps, y, ϕq “ E       ´|Qpxptq, ψptqq|θ2 ptq ´ γθptq dt ` γT ˇ xpsq “ y, ψpsq “ ϕ ,              (9)
                                                                         ˇ
                                s


where γ P R is the Lagrange multiplier for (6).
    We define the optimal value function associated with this control problem as


                                          V ps, y, ϕq :“ sup J θ ps, y, ϕq.                                 (10)
                                                        θ“θp¨q


    Consequently, ART reframes timestep allocation as the problem of controlling the time-warping rate θ
in the augmented dynamics (4), with the objective (9) capturing how numerical error should be managed
along the reverse diffusion trajectory.



4     Randomized Control and Reinforcement Learning Formulation
    The formulation in Section 3 provides a principled way to pose timestep allocation as a control problem,
but it does not immediately yield a practical solution method in high dimensions. In general, the ART
objective (9) admits no closed-form solutions, and the associated Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation
with a large d is numerically prohibitive due to the curse of dimensionality. To remedy this, we introduce
an auxiliary randomized control reformulation in which the time-warping rate is produced by a stochastic
policy. The role of randomization here is not for “exploration” due to an unknown environment in the
usual reinforcement learning (RL) sense; rather, it is a technical device that enables us to apply the recently
developed continuous-time RL theory and algorithms (Wang et al., 2020; Jia and Zhou, 2022a,b). We


                                                         8
refer this reformulation as Adaptive Reparameterized Time via Reinforcement Learning (ART-RL), which
we develop in the remainder of this section.


4.1            ART-RL: An auxiliary problem with Gaussian policies

      We replace the deterministic control θ by a randomized feedback policy that assigns, at each pt, x, ψq, a
probability distribution generating time-warping rates. Specifically, we take the following Gaussian policy
class whose variance depends on the local numerical sensitivity encoded by Q:1
                                                                      ˆ                             ˙
                                                                                        λ
                                               π pλq p¨ | t, x, ψq “ N µpt, x, ψq,                      ,                                   (11)
                                                                                     |Qpx, ψq|

where µ is a (deterministic) measurable function and λ ě 0 is a scalar parameter. The particular form
of the variance ties policy randomization to the geometry of the surrogate error: since |Q| governs the
Euler residual through (7), the variance λ{|Q| suppresses policy-induced randomness in stiff regions (large
|Q|) while allowing comparatively more randomness otherwise, while λ controls the overall level of this
randomization without changing the mean. For analysis, we assume |Qpx, ψq| ą 0 almost surely on compact
intervals of px, ψq. In implementation we replace |Q| by |Q| _ ε :“ maxp|Q|, εq for a small ε ą 0.
      We now present the “exploratory formulation” of ART, following Wang et al. (2020).                                               Denote by
    pλq                                                                                        pλq          pλq
Π         the collection of policies of the form (11). For a fixed policy π                             P Π       , the corresponding state
      pλq              pλq
pxπ         ptq, ψ π         ptqqtPr0,T s satisfies the “exploratory” dynamics

            $
                 π pλq       ż
            ’ dx
            ’          ptq          ` pλq           pλq  ˘
            ’
            ’              “    θ F xπ ptq, ψ π ptq
            ’
            ’
            ’     dt          R
            &                       ´         pλq       pλq
                                                                ¯                             pλq
                               π pλq θ | t, xπ ptq, ψ π ptq dθ,                          xπ         p0q “ x0 „ PT ,                        (12a)
            ’
            ’
            ’      pλq
              dψ π ptq
            ’                ż        ´                           ¯
            ’                                     pλq       pλq                               pλq                    pλq
                           “ θ π pλq θ | t, xπ ptq, ψ π ptq dθ,                          ψπ         p0q “ 0, ψ π           pT q “ T.       (12b)
            ’
            ’
            %
                  dt          R


Moreover, the performance criterion is
                                  «ż ż
                                    T  ´                                   ¯
               pλq                           `     pλq      pλq ˘                           pλq      pλq
          Jπ         ps, y, ϕq “ E       ´ |Q t, xπ ptq, ψ π ptq | θ2 ´ γ θ π pλq pθ | t, xπ ptq, ψ π ptqq dθ dt
                                       s   R
                                                                                           ff                                               (13)
                                                            ˇ
                                                            ˇ πpλq            π pλq
                                                ` pγ ` λq T ˇ x    psq “ y, ψ       psq “ ϕ .


Here, the additional term λT in (13) is to compensate a constant bias induced by Gaussian randomization,
so that the resulting criterion is comparable to the deterministic one under the same mean control. To see
this, fix any mean function µpt, x, ψq and consider the Gaussian policy (11). Taking the policy expectation
                                                     ş`               ˘
of the deterministic running cost yields the identity R ´ |Q| θ2 ´ γ θ π pλq pθ | t, x, ψq dθ “ ´ |Q| µ2 ´ γ µ ´ λ.
    1 The reason for choosing the Gaussian policies will be revealed in the subsequent theoretical analysis.




                                                                       9
The associated optimal value function is

                                                              pλq
                      V pλq ps, y, ϕq “         max J π             ps, y, ϕq,        ps, y, ϕq P r0, T s ˆ Rd ˆ R.             (14)
                                              π pλq PΠpλq



4.2    Connecting the original and randomized formulations

   We now establish that the solution to the original ART control problem (10) can be recovered from that
to the randomized one (14). Indeed, the value function V of (10) satisfies the HJB equation

                                              !`                        ˘                )
                                 Vt ` sup          VxJ F px, ψq ` Vψ ´ γ θ ´ |Qpx, ψq| θ2 “ 0,                                  (15)
                                          θ


together with the terminal condition V pT, x, ψq “ γT . Meanwhile, the value function V pλq of (14) satisfies

                   pλq
                                 !`
                                                               pλq      ˘             ´                  λ      ¯)
                 Vt      ` sup        VxpλqJ F px, ψq ` Vψ           ´ γ µ ´ |Qpx, ψq| µ2 `                        “ 0,         (16)
                            µ                                                                         |Qpx, ψq|

with terminal condition V pλq pT, x, ψq “ pγ ` λqT .
   The following theorem discloses a precise relationship between them.

Theorem 1. If V is a classical solution to the HJB equation (15), then V pλq is a classical solution to the
HJB equation (16) where
                                                    V pλq pt, x, ψq “ V pt, x, ψq ` λt                                          (17)

is a classical solution to HJB equation (16). Moreover,
                                       ˆ                                ˙
                                                               λ                                       VxJ F px, ψq ` Vψ ´ γ
           π pλq˚ p¨|t, x, ψq “ N       µ˚ pt, x, ψq,                            with µ˚ pt, x, ψq “                            (18)
                                                            |Qpx, ψq|                                        2|Qpx, ψq|

is the optimal policy for the auxiliary problem (14) subject to the dynamics (12). Finally, µ˚ pt, x, ψq is the
optimal policy for the original problem (10) subject to the dynamics (4).

Proof. First of all, the “sup” in the two equations (15) and (16) are respectively achieved at

                                                                                            pλqJ                 pλq
                                      VxJ F px, ψq ` Vψ ´ γ                  Vx                    F px, ψq ` Vψ       ´γ
                 θ˚ pt, x, ψq “                             , µ˚ pt, x, ψq “                                                .
                                            2|Qpx, ψq|                                              2|Qpx, ψq|

So if V solves (15) and V pλq is chosen to satisfy (17), then the above two maximizers are identical. Moreover,
it is straightforward to check that V pλq solves (16).
   Next, we show V pλq and π pλq are respectively the optimal value function and optimal policy for the
randomized problem (14) via a standard verification approach. Fix a policy π pλq . Applying Itô’s lemma to




                                                                        10
               pλq              pλq
V pλq pt, xπ         ptq, ψ π         ptqq, we have

                                       pλq       pλq                               pλq          pλq
                 V pλq pT, xπ pT q, ψ π pT qq ´ V pλq ps, xπ psq, ψ π psqq
                    ż Tˆ                                                                          ˙
                                 pλq      pλq             pλq     pλq               pλq      pλq
                 `        ´|Qpxπ ptq, ψ π ptqq|µpt, xπ ptq, ψ π ptqq2 ´ λ ´ γµpt, xπ ptq, ψ π ptqq dt
                         s
                     ż Tˆ
                                pλq                      pλq              pλq             pλq         pλq              pλq
               “             Vt        ` pVxpλqJ F pxπ         ptq, ψ π
                                                                  ´ γqµpt, xπ   ptqq ` Vψ                   ptq, ψ π         ptqq
                      s
                                                                     ˙
                            pλq      pλq          pλq      pλq
                     ´ |Qpxπ ptq, ψ π ptqq|µpt, xπ ptq, ψ π ptqq2 ´ λ dt

               ď0,

where the last inequality follows from the HJB equation (16). Thus, we have


                V pλq ps, y, ϕq
                 „ż T ˆ                                                                           ˙
                                   pλq    pλq         pλq      pλq                  pλq      pλq
               ěE         ´|Qpxπ ptq, ψ π ptqq|µpt, xπ ptq, ψ π ptqq2 ´ λ ´ γµpt, xπ ptq, ψ π ptqq dt
                    s
                                                                        ȷ                                                           (19)
                                pλq     pλq      pλq           pλq
                ` V pλq pT, xπ pT q, ψ π pT qq|xπ psq “ y, ψ π psq “ ϕ
                       pλq
               “J π          ps, y, ϕq.

When the policy (18) is taken, the above inequality becomes equality because (18) achieves the supremum in
the HJB equation (16). This establishes the optimality of the policy (18) along with V pλq being the optimal
value function. On the other hand, noticing the previous analysis applies to the case when λ “ 0 and µ˚ is
independent of λ, we arrive at the final conclusion of theorem.



    Theorem 1 implies that the ART solution can be recovered by solving the ART-RL problem (14) with
Gaussian policies. The latter can indeed be solved using an actor–critic scheme that is not directly applicable
to the former. We will carry this out in the next section.



5     ART-RL Actor–Critic: Theory and Algorithm
    Building on Theorem 1, we now work within ART-RL to learn the ART optimizer. Our approach is
premised upon the continuous-time actor–critic framework of Jia and Zhou (2022b), adapted to the ART-
RL setting and in particular the Gaussian policies. We start with two theorems on policy evaluation and
policy improvement, followed by development of the resulting algorithm.




                                                                                     11
5.1      Theoretical results: policy evaluation and improvement

     In an actor–critic method, the critic estimates the value of a given policy, while the actor updates/im-
proves the policy by moving in a favorable direction guided by this value information. Theorem 2 below
formalizes this idea. For any Gaussian policy π pλq , it first characterizes the associated value function, and
then constructs a new Gaussian policy π̃ pλq , whose mean is obtained by a Hamiltonian-type maximization
based on that value function, and shows that this updated policy improves the value for all states.

                                                                                                λ
Theorem 2. (i) The value function under a Gaussian policy π pλq p¨|t, x, ψq “ N pµpt, x, ψq, |Qpx,ψq| q is given
by
                                                                        pλq
                                                                   Jπ         pt, x, ψq “ v̄pt, x, ψq ` λt,                                                   (20)

where v̄ satisfies the linear PDE


                                    v̄t ` pv̄xJ F px, ψq ` v̄ψ ´ γqµpt, x, ψq ´ |Qpx, ψq|µpt, x, ψq2 “ 0,                                                     (21)


with the terminal condition v̄pT, x, ψq “ γT .
     (ii) Consider the policy defined as
                                    ˆ                                         ˙
                                                                  λ                                           v̄x pt, x, ψqJ F px, ψq ` v̄ψ pt, x, ψq ´ γ
      π̃ pλq p¨|t, x, ψq “ N            µ̃pt, x, ψq,                              ,     µ̃pt, x, ψq “                                                     .   (22)
                                                               |Qpx, ψq|                                                      2|Qpx, ψq|

Then π̃ pλq improves the original policy π pλq in the sense that

                                                         pλq                           pλq
                                                  J π̃         pt, x, ψq ě J π               pt, x, ψq      for all   pt, x, ψq.


Proof. (i) For a given policy π pλq , applying the Feynman-Kac formula leads to the following PDE for the
                        pλq
value function J π            :

                             pλq            pλq                               pλq
                       Jtπ         ` pJxπ         J
                                                      F px, ψq ` Jψπ                  ´ γqµpt, x, ψq ´ |Qpx, ψq|µpt, x, ψq2 ´ λ “ 0,

           pλq                                                                                  pλq
with J π         pT, x, ψq “ pγ ` λqT . Since the function J π                                        defined in (20) satisfies the above PDE, the result
follows from the uniqueness of the solution to linear PDE.
                                      pλq                                                           pλq
     (ii) From Part (i), J π̃               can also be expressed as J π̃                                 pt, x, ψq “ ṽpt, x, ψq ` λt, where ṽ satisfies


                                    ṽt ` pṽxJ F px, ψq ` ṽψ ´ γqµ̃pt, x, ψq ´ |Qpx, ψq|µ̃pt, x, ψq2 “ 0,                                                   (23)


with ṽpT, x, ψq “ γT .
     Take the left hand side of (21) as a quadratic function in µpt, x, ψq, which clearly achieves the maximum




                                                                                               12
at µ̃pt, x, ψq. Hence


                                              v̄t ` pv̄xJ F px, ψq ` v̄ψ ´ γqµ̃pt, x, ψq ´ |Qpx, ψq|µ̃pt, x, ψq2
                                                                                                                                                                                     (24)
                                         ěv̄t ` pv̄xJ F px, ψq ` v̄ψ ´ γqµpt, x, ψq ´ |Qpx, ψq|µpt, x, ψq2 “ 0.

It now follows from the comparison principle for PDEs applied to (23) and (24) that ṽpt, x, ψq ě v̄pt, x, ψq.
                             pλq                        pλq
Equivalently, J π̃                 pt, x, ψq ě J π            pt, x, ψq for all pt, x, ψq.

   Theorem 2 is a pure theoretical result that cannot be used directly for computation, because it involves
solving PDEs that are intractable in high dimensions. However, it provides the foundation for the next
theorem that in turn underpins an implementable, data-driven actor–critic scheme.

Theorem 3. (i) Let π pλq be a Gaussian policy and V̂ be a continuous function with V̂ pT, x, ψq “ γT ` λT .
                       pλq                                                                     π pλq          π pλq                                                pλq
Denote by θπ                 a control sampled from π pλq and by pxθ                                   , ψθ           q the state process under θπ                       with the
                                   π pλq                                π pλq
initial condition xθ                         psq “ y and ψ θ                    psq “ ϕ. If for any measurable function ξ and every ps, y, ϕq P
                   d
pr0, T s ˆ R ˆ Rq,

               „ż T
                            π pλq          π pλq
              E     ξpt, xθ       ptq, ψ θ       ptqq
                 s
                    ˆ                                                                                                       ˙ȷ
                                   pλq            pλq                 pλq           pλq
                                θπ             θπ                  θπ            θπ            π pλq 2          π pλq
                      dV̂ pt, x        ptq, ψ         ptqq ´ p|Qpx        ptq, ψ        ptqq|θ         ptq ` γθ       ptqqdt   “0

                                   pλq
holds, then V̂ ” J π                     .
                                                                                                                                                                   pλq
                                               λ
   (ii) Let π̂p¨|t, x, ψq “ N pµ̂pt, x, ψq, |Qpx,ψq| q where µ̂ is a continuous function. Denote by θπ̂                                                                  a control
                                                   π̂ pλq          π̂ pλq                                           pλq                                              π̂ pλq
sampled from π̂ pλq and by pxθ                              , ψθ            q the state process under θπ̂                 with the initial condition xθ                       psq “ y
          π̂ pλq
and ψ θ            psq “ ϕ. If for any measurable function η and for every ps, y, ϕq P pr0, T s ˆ Rd ˆ Rq,

            „ż T                                      ˆ                                                          ˙
                            pλq              pλq                                      pλq               pλq
                       θ π̂             θ π̂               π̂ pλq                θ π̂              θ π̂
           E     ηpt, x         ptq, ψ           ptqq θ           ptq ´ µ̂pt, x           ptq, ψ            ptqq
              s
                 ˆ                                                                                                                   ˙ȷ
                        pλq         π̂ pλq           π̂ pλq                   π̂ pλq            π̂ pλq           pλq          pλq
                   dJ π pt, xθ             ptq, ψ θ         ptqq ´ p|Qpxθ              ptq, ψ θ          ptqq|θπ̃ 2 ptq ` γθπ̂ ptqqdt   “0


holds, then µ̂ ” µ̃ as defined in Theorem 2-(ii).

Proof. (i) The equation presented in the statement is the martingale orthogonality condition for policy
evaluation, developed in Jia and Zhou (2022a). By following the same reasoning as in the proof of Proposition
4 therein, we arrive at the following expression:
                „ż T ˆ                                                  ˙                                           ȷ
                                      π pλq          π pλq
                           pλq                                    pλq
                                                                                   ˇ πpλq              π pλq
V̂ ps, y, ϕq “ E       ´γθπ ptq´|Qpxθ       ptq, ψ θ       ptqq|θπ 2 ptq dt`γT `λT ˇxθ    psq “ y, ψ θ       psq “ ϕ ,
                                                                                   ˇ
                             s

                                                                                                          pλq
which is consistent with the definition of the value function J π                                               .
                                                                                                 π̂ pλq               π̂ pλq                            π̂ pλq              π̂ pλq
   (ii) To simplify the notation, we denote ηptq :“ ηpt, xθ                                               ptq, ψ θ             ptqq, v̄ptq “ v̄pt, xθ            ptq, ψ θ            ptqq,


                                                                                          13
                               π pλq                  π pλq                                     π pλq              π pλq                             π̂ pλq              π̂ pλq
F ptq :“ F pxθ                         ptq, ψ θ               ptqq, Qptq :“ Qpxθ                        ptq, ψ θ           ptqq, µ̂ptq :“ µ̂pt, xθ            ptq, ψ θ            ptqq, and Jptq :“
                         pλq                    pλq
    π pλq         θ π̂                   θ π̂
J           pt, x              ptq, ψ                 ptqq “ v̄ptq ` λt.
      Applying Ito’s lemma to J, we have
                   „ż T                           "                                             *ȷ
                               π̂ pλq                          π̂ pλq               π̂ pλq 2
               0 “E     ηptqpθ        ptq ´ µ̂ptqq dJptq ´ pγθ        ptq ` |Qptq|θ          qdt
                                  s
                           „ż T                                           "                                                                 * ȷ
                                                        pλq                                                             pλq             pλq
                      “E                ηptqpθπ̂              ptq ´ µ̂ptqq v̄t ptq ` λ ` pv̄x ptqF ptq ` v̄ψ ptq ´ γqθπ̂ ptq ´ |Qptq|θπ̂ 2 dt
                                  s
                               żT      "                                          *
                                  λ
                      “E   ηptq          v̄x ptqF ptq ` v̄ψ ptq ´ γ ´ 2|Qptq|µ̂ptq dt.
                         s      |Qptq|

Because this equations holds for any η, the integrand must be zero. Therefore, we obtain the condition


                                                                           v̄x ptqF ptq ` v̄ψ ptq ´ γ ´ 2|Qptq|µ̂ptq “ 0,


or
                                                                                                  v̄x ptqF ptq ` v̄ψ ptq ´ γ
                                                                                     µ̂ptq “                                 .
                                                                                                            2|Qptq|

This expression is identical with µ̃ defined in (22) of Theorem 2-(ii).
                                  pλq                           π̂ pλq              π̂ pλq
      The term θπ̂                      ptq´ µ̂pt, xθ                    ptq, ψ θ            ptqq in the equation of Theorem 3-(ii) reveals why invoking stochas-
                                                                                                        pλq
tic policies is vital for our approach to work: θπ̂                                                           ptq is sampled from the Gaussian policy with the mean
             π̂ pλq                π̂ pλq
µ̂pt, xθ              ptq, ψ θ              ptqq so the two terms are generally different. In this case the equation provides a genuine
direction for policy improvements. If we consider only deterministic policies, then these terms are identical
and the equation becomes trivial giving away no information at all about the direction for improvement.
This observation highlights the necessity of recasting ART as ART-RL. In the following subsections, we
develop an ART-RL algorithm based on the established results.


5.2           Actor–critic parameterization and update rules

      Guided by Theorems 2 and 3, we now turn the analytical results into concrete actor–critic update rules.
The parametrization of the critic follows the structure (20) in Theorem 2(i), while the parametrization of the
actor is chosen within the Gaussian class (11) designed for ART-RL. Specifically, For function approximations
of the actor and critic, by Theorems 2 and 3, we parameterize the value function and policy using two separate
neural network functions N N ϑc and N N ϑa :

                                                                                                                                ˆ                                                    ˙
                                                                                                                                                                      λ
                       V̂ ϑc pt, x, ψq “ N N ϑc pt, x, ψq ` λt,                                          π̂ ϑa p¨ | t, x, ψq “ N N N ϑa pt, x, ψq,                                       .    (25)
                                                                                                                                                                   |Qpx, ψq|

      Applying Theorem 3 to the parametrization (25) yields, for suitable test processes ξ and η, the coupled




                                                                                                               14
moment conditions
$              „ż T                                                                                                              ȷ
                        ` ϑ           π̂ ϑa          π̂ ϑa                π̂ ϑa           π̂ ϑa            ϑa              ϑa  ˘
                                   θ               θ                    θ               θ               π̂    2         π̂
’
’
’
’             E     ξptq dV̂ pt, x
                             c
                                            ptq, ψ         ptqq ´ p|Qpx          ptq, ψ          ptqq|θ         ptq ` γθ ptqqdt “ 0,
’
’                0
’
& „ż T     ` ϑa                    π̂ ϑa          π̂ ϑa       ˘`              π̂ ϑa           π̂ ϑa
 E     ηptq θπ̂ ptq ´ N N ϑa pt, xθ ptq, ψ θ ptqq dV̂ ϑc pt, xθ ptq, ψ θ ptqq
’
’   0
’
’                                                                                                                                ȷ
                                                                          π̂ ϑa           π̂ ϑa
’                                                                                                          ϑa              ϑa  ˘
                                                                ´ p|Qpxθ ptq, ψ θ ptqq|θπ̂ 2 ptq ` γθπ̂ ptqqdt “ 0,
’
’
%
                                                                                                                                        (26)
                  ϑa               ϑa
           θ π̂             θ π̂                                                           π̂ ϑa
where px               ,ψ               q denotes the state process under a control θ              generated from the Gaussian policy π̂ ϑa ,
which can be simulated and therefore observable as data.
   In addition, we take the following test processes:

                                     B               π̂ ϑa    π̂ ϑa                         B               π̂ ϑa    π̂ ϑa
                   ξptq “               N N ϑc pt, xθ ptq, ψ θ ptqq,              ηptq “       N N ϑa pt, xθ ptq, ψ θ ptqq,
                                    Bϑc                                                    Bϑa

which are consistent with the standard choices in the RL actor–critic literature (Sutton and Barto, 1998;
Konda and Tsitsiklis, 1999; Jia and Zhou, 2022b; Huang et al., 2022; Huang, 2025).
   To derive update rules, we interpret the moment conditions (26) as equations in pϑc , ϑa q and solve them by
stochastic approximation. We use subscript n to denote quantities at iteration n; for example, ϑc,n denotes
the value of ϑc at the n-th iteration. Given the n-th observed trajectory pxn , ψn , θn q generated/sampled
from the current policy π̂ ϑa,n and a learning rate an ą 0, we update the critic and actor parameters by


                                                     żT
                                                          BN N ϑc
                       ϑc,n`1 Ð ϑc,n ` an                         pt, xn ptq, ψn ptqq
                                                      0    Bϑc
                                                      “                                                                     ‰
                                                     ¨ dV̂ ϑc pt, xn ptq, ψn ptqq ´ p|Qpxn ptq, ψn ptqq|θn ptq2 ` γθn ptqqdt ,         (27a)
                                                     żT
                                                          BN N ϑa                    `                                    ˘
                       ϑa,n`1 Ð ϑa,n ` an                         pt, xn ptq, ψn ptqq θn ptq ´ N N ϑa pt, xn ptq, ψn ptqq
                                                      0    Bϑa
                                                      “                                                                     ‰
                                                     ¨ dV̂ ϑc pt, xn ptq, ψn ptqq ´ p|Qpxn ptq, ψn ptqq|θn ptq2 ` γθn ptqqdt .         (27b)


   Finally, the Lagrange multiplier γ, enforcing the terminal constraint on ψ, is updated along the same
trajectory by
                                                                           `           ˘
                                                             γn`1 Ð γn ` an ψn pT q ´ T .                                               (28)

Equations (27) and (28) constitute the theoretical update rules of all the learnable parameters in ART-RL.


5.3     Time-discretized ART-RL actor–critic algorithm

   To have an implementable algorithm, the final step is to discretize the previous update rules. To this
end, we work on a uniform time grid 0 “ t0 ă t1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă tK “ T with step size ∆t “ T {K. For the n-th



                                                                             15
iteration, write

            ϑ
          V̂k c,n :“ V̂ ϑc,n ptk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk qq “ N N ϑc,n ptk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk qq ` λtk ,   k “ 0, . . . , K.


A simple Riemann approximation of the integrals in (27) leads to the time-discretized critic and actor updates


                                 K´1
                                 ÿ  BN N ϑc,n `                        ˘
         ϑc,n`1 Ð ϑc,n ` an                     tk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk q
                               k“0
                                        Bϑc
                         ”                                                                   ˘ ı
                             ϑc,n      ϑ     `
                        ˆ V̂k`1   ´ V̂k c,n ´ |Qpxn ptk q, ψn ptk qq| θn ptk q2 ` γn θn ptk q ∆t ,                        (29a)

                                 K´1
                                 ÿ  BN N ϑa,n `                        ˘`                                            ˘
         ϑa,n`1 Ð ϑa,n ` an                     tk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk q θn ptk q ´ N N ϑa,n ptk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk qq
                               k“0
                                        Bϑ a
                         ”                                                                   ˘ ı
                             ϑc,n      ϑ     `
                        ˆ V̂k`1   ´ V̂k c,n ´ |Qpxn ptk q, ψn ptk qq| θn ptk q2 ` γn θn ptk q ∆t .                        (29b)


The update for the Lagrange multiplier is unchanged:

                                                             `           ˘
                                               γn`1 Ð γn ` an ψn pT q ´ T ,                                                (30)


where ψn pT q “ ψn ptK q.
   We summarize the resulting ART-RL actor-critic scheme in Algorithm 1. The inner loop generates one
trajectory under the current Gaussian policy (25), and the outer loop then updates the actor, critic, and
Lagrange multiplier via (29) and (30).

Algorithm 1 Time-discretized ART-RL Actor-Critic
  for n “ 1 to N do
     Set k “ 0, t “ tk “ 0, initialize pxn pt0 q, ψn pt0 qq
     while t ă T do
         Compute policy mean mn,k “ N N ϑa,n ptk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk qq    ´                              ¯
         Sample control according to the Gaussian policy (25) θn ptk q „ N mn,k , |Qpxn ptkλq,ψn ptk qq|
        Update pxn ptk`1 q, ψn ptk`1 qq by one time step of the ART dynamics (4)
        Increment time: tk`1 “ tk ` ∆t, k Ð k ` 1
     end while
     Collect trajectory tptk , xn ptk q, ψn ptk q, θn ptk qquK´1
                                                             k“0
     Update critic parameters ϑc,n`1 via (29a)
     Update actor parameters ϑa,n`1 via (29b)
     Update multiplier γn`1 via (30)
  end for




                                                                16
6     Numerical Experiments
    We now numerically evaluate ART-RL across several regimes that differ in dimensionality, numerical
solver, model capacity, and experimental protocol. The central practical question is whether ART-RL can
improve existing samplers by changing only the timestep grid, while leaving the pretrained model, solver,
and other sampling components unchanged. In this section, the EDM- and EDM2-based experiments test
this question in modern image-generation pipelines, while the one-dimensional analytical-score experiment
isolates discretization effects and the MNIST experiment tests a less optimized score model.


6.1    Experimental setup and baselines

Datasets.    We consider both synthetic and real-image settings. For the former, we conduct an experiment
where a synthetic target distribution on R whose score function is known precisely and explicitly, allowing
us to isolate the effect of time reparameterization from score-estimation errors. For the latter, which con-
sists of several high-dimensional image generation tasks, we work on the following datasets: 1) CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009), a dataset of 32 ˆ 32 natural images from ten classes; 2) AFHQv2, a variant
of the AFHQ animal faces dataset (Choi et al., 2020) with 64 ˆ 64 images of cats, dogs, and wildlife; 3)
FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019), a collection of human face images that we downsample to 64 ˆ 64 as in Karras
et al. (2022); and 4) ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), which we evaluate at both 64 ˆ 64 and 512 ˆ 512
resolutions. The ImageNet–64 experiment follows the standard EDM setup of Karras et al. (2022), while the
ImageNet–512 experiment adopts the EDM2 setting of Karras et al. (2024). The latter is important because
it evaluates ART-RL on a more modern backbone and sampling pipeline, moves from pixel-space diffusion
to latent-space diffusion, and tests substantially higher-resolution image generation. To study a small-model
regime, we also consider MNIST (LeCun et al., 2002), a dataset of 28 ˆ 28 grayscale handwritten digits, and
train a compact score model directly on this dataset.


Timestep schedules and baselines.            We compare four timestep schedules that differ in how they allocate
a fixed number of function evaluations along the reverse trajectory.
    Uniform is the simplest choice and serves as a reference baseline: it discretizes the physical time interval
τ P r0, T s using an equally spaced grid.
    EDM is the hand-designed schedule by Karras et al. (2022), which is widely adopted in diffusion sampling
and is known to perform strongly on standard image benchmarks. The discrete timesteps are calculated by

                                 ´
                                   1{ρ   k ` 1{ρ    1{ρ
                                                        ˘¯ρ
                             τk “ σmax `    σmin ´ σmax     ,         k “ 0, . . . , K,
                                         K

with hyperparameters σmin ą 0, σmax ą σmin , and ρ ą 0. Following Karras et al. (2022) we use the
recommended default ρ “ 7. Equivalently, this construction corresponds to using a uniform grid in the
                                            1{ρ      1{ρ
transformed coordinate σ 1{ρ between σmax and σmin , and hence can be interpreted as a fixed, pre-specified


                                                           17
time reparameterization.
   DPM-Solver (Lu et al., 2022), henceforth denoted as DPM, provides another strong hand-designed
timestep grid that is widely used in fast diffusion sampling. We use its standard uniform log-SNR grid
only as a timestep schedule, without changing the numerical integrator. In the variance-exploding (VE)
setting, this gives the geometrically spaced noise levels

                                               ´σ      ¯k{K
                                                 min
                                   τk “ σmax                  ,   k “ 0, . . . , K,
                                                σmax

where σmin ą 0 and σmax ą σmin .
   ART-RL is our learned schedule, obtained from the ART objective and implemented by Algorithm 1.
With ART, a control θ induces a time change ψ, and sampling is performed by placing a uniform grid on the
reparameterized clock and mapping it back to physical time through ψ. This construction indeed includes
the other three schedules as special cases: the identity map ψptq “ t recovers Uniform, selecting ψ to match
the EDM coordinate σ 1{ρ (up to a constant rescaling) reproduces EDM, and selecting ψ so that the induced
grid is uniform in the DPM-Solver log-SNR coordinate leads to DPM. Importantly, ART-RL learns ψ from
data, making the schedule adaptive and allowing timestep allocation to move beyond hand-crafted designs
when this improves sampling accuracy under a fixed evaluation budget.


Evaluation metrics.      We assess sampling performance using metrics appropriate to the dimensionality and
application settings. In the one-dimensional synthetic experiment, sampling accuracy is quantified by the
squared Wasserstein distance W2 between the empirical distribution of generated samples and the (known)
target distribution. We report this metric alongside the number of timesteps used by the Euler discretization.
For the image-generation experiments, we adopt the standard evaluation protocol and measure sample quality
using the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) as a function of the number of function evaluations (NFE). For
the MNIST small-model diagnostic, where Inception features are less natural for handwritten digits, we
instead report LeNet-FID using a LeNet feature space. When experiments are conducted within the EDM
pipeline (Karras et al., 2022), all components other than the timestep schedule are held fixed; so differences
in log FID–NFE curves can be attributed solely to the choice of time discretization. We use FID for image-
generation because it is the standard metric in the EDM and EDM2 evaluations and is applicable across
the face, animal-face, and ImageNet experiments considered here. Metrics such as Inception Score can be
useful as supplemental diagnostics on class-diverse ImageNet-style data, but they are less informative for
narrow-domain datasets such as FFHQ or AFHQv2 and are therefore not used here.


Training cost and amortization.        ART-RL requires an offline one-off training stage to learn the schedule,
whereas Uniform, EDM, and DPM are hand-designed and therefore training-free. This training cost should
be interpreted differently from inference or sampling cost: in our CIFAR–10 image experiment, learning the
schedule for a given number of timesteps takes about 1–2 hours on a Colab T4 GPU, and this cost is paid


                                                         18
only once. After training, we find it justified to distill the learned policy into a fixed precomputed time
grid; so deployment for sampling is identical to using a hand-designed schedule: the sampler simply reads a
list of timesteps, and ART-RL introduces no additional inference-time overhead relative to EDM or DPM.
No retraining or architectural modification of the score model is required, nor is any change made to the
solver other than the locations at which it evaluates the same reverse dynamics. In this sense, ART-RL
is not a competing diffusion backbone or a new sampler implementation; it is a learned schedule that can
be dropped into an existing sampler. Moreover, we further experiment on amortizing the cost by transfer
learning. Specifically, we reuse the same distilled schedule trained on CIFAR–10 with a certain number
of timesteps across different timestep counts, target datasets, and the EDM2 latent-space pipeline without
retraining, and find that the results still improve over those of the hand-designed grids. Thus, the relevant
practical question is not only whether ART-RL improves a single trained configuration, but whether a learned
time parametrization can serve as a reusable schedule across many sampling settings. The generalization
experiments reported in Section 6.5 will test this point.


Presentation of quantitative curves.           Numerical results will be reported in various tables throughout
this section; here we first present a visual overview in Figure 3. To cater for different error scales, the figure
collects the error curves using a logarithmic vertical axis and a linear horizontal axis in timestep count or
NFE. This log-scale presentation avoids compressing the larger-budget regime, where FID, LeNet-FID, and
Wasserstein errors are small but the differences between schedules remain important. Clearly, ART achieves
the best results over all the experimented datasets and timestep budgets.


6.2      Experiment with known score function

     The first experiment disentangles the effect of timestep allocation from score approximation, where a
one–dimensional diffusion model for which all coefficients in the probability–flow ODE are available in closed
forms. This setting allows sampling performance to be attributed solely to the choice of time discretization.
     The forward diffusion begins at p0 “ N p0, 1q, follows the variance exploding (VE) dynamics dxptq “
?
    2t dwptq and terminates at T “ 3. The marginal law admits the explicit form xptq „ pt “ N p0, 1` t2 q, with
the terminal distribution pT “ N p0, 10q. The associated score function is then given by Spt, xq “ ´x{p1`t2 q.
     Under this specialization, substituting the analytical score into the general definitions (5) and (8) produces
explicit expressions for the reparameterized probability–flow field and the Euler error coefficient, namely
                       `            ˘                  `             ˘2
F px, ψq “ ´pT ´ ψqx{ 1 ` pT ´ ψq2 and Qpx, ψq “ x{ 1 ` pT ´ ψq2 .
     We next examine the time–warping control learned by ART–RL. We test different number K of timesteps,
and here we discuss the case of K “ 100. After training with K “ 100, we collect the realized θ sequences
from the final 10,000 backward trajectories. To remove incidental fluctuations in the terminal condition due
to computational errors, each trajectory is rescaled so that the resulting time change integrates exactly to T .
We then compute pointwise summary statistics across trajectories, reporting the empirical mean together


                                                        19
Figure 3: Visual overview of ART-RL across experiments. Each panel uses a logarithmic vertical axis and
compares schedules at matched timestep counts or matched NFE. DPM denotes the DPM-Solver timestep
grid.




                                                  20
with the interquartile (IQR) range (25–75 percentiles) at each timestep. These aggregated statistics are
shown in Figure 4.




Figure 4: Empirical mean (solid line) and 25–75 percent IQR range (shaded region) of the executed control
θ across the last 10,000 training trajectories in the one–dimensional experiment with K “ 100 timesteps.
Each trajectory is normalized so that the resulting terminal time satisfies ψpT q “ T .


   Figure 4 shows that the mean curve of θ is very smooth and the IQR band is extremely narrow. Moreover,
when we plot the 99 percent empirical confidence band (see Appendix A.1, Figure 8), the shaded region is
visually indistinguishable from the mean curve. This observation is prevalent with other values of K, which
indicates that, in this one–dimensional example, the learned control θ depends only weakly on the state and
can be effectively regarded as a deterministic function of time. In other words, the policy has collapsed to
an almost time-only schedule.
   Motivated by this observation, we perform a simple distillation step for this one-dimensional example:
for each given K we discard the neural network parameterization of the actor (which in general is a feedback
policy function of pt, x, ψq) and replace it with the empirical mean curve of θ as a fixed function of t. This
distilled approach has two important advantages.
   First, it removes entirely the cost of evaluating a neural network to obtain θ at each step. Although the
actor network is indeed not large (e.g. much smaller than the score model), repeatedly evaluating it along
every sampling trajectory still incurs a nontrivial computational overhead. After distillation, sampling under
the ART-RL schedule requires no additional computation beyond that of standard schemes such as Uniform
or EDM. In fact, the timestep sequence is precomputed once and then reused.
   Second, it eliminates residual mismatch in the terminal time. While the learned actor attempts to enforce
ψpT q “ T , individual trajectories may slightly overshoot or undershoot T when θ is produced by a neural
network at every timestep. This discrepancy is negligible when the number of timesteps K is small but
becomes significant as K grows due to the need of a finer time grid. By distilling to a deterministic schedule
whose increments are explicitly normalized to sum to T , we guarantee that the induced time grid hits T
exactly at the end, thereby improving the numerical fidelity of the discretized probability flow ODE.
   We now present the results with different timestep budgets, where the comparison is remarkably consis-
tent. As shown in Figure 3(a) and Table 1, DPM performs the worst among all compared schedules for every
value of K, while EDM also underperforms the Uniform grid throughout. By contrast, ART-RL achieves the


                                                     21
best Wasserstein–2 error consistently, with a clear margin over all baselines. These results also show that
the hand-designed schedules DPM and EDM are designed specifically for image benchmarks and may fail in
other domains even in simple toy examples.

      Table 1: Wasserstein–2 error versus number of timesteps K in the one–dimensional experiment.

                           K               2      5         10     20      50     100
                           Uniform     .468     .215    .114      .060    .027    .016
                           DPM         .670     .401    .211      .113    .049    .027
                           EDM         .664     .319    .177      .094    .041    .023
                           ART-RL     .345     .149    .079      .042    .020    .013


   The one–dimensional study in this subsection isolates timestep effects using an analytical score model and
shows that ART-RL can learn an effective schedule in a principled way. Starting from the next subsection,
we move to image benchmarks and ask whether similar distillation and other generalization techniques still
work empirically for more complex tasks.


6.3    CIFAR–10 under EDM pipeline

   We next conduct CIFAR–10 experiments within the official EDM pipeline (Karras et al., 2022), keeping
the score network, noise conditioning, hyperparameters, and all implementation details fixed across methods
under comparison, except the timestep schedule.
   First of all, for ART-RL trained on CIFAR–10 with K “ 18, Figure 5 shows that the empirical 99 percent
confidence band remains narrow around a smooth positive mean curve. Similar concentration is observed
for other time step counts. This supports distilling the CIFAR–10 trained policies into deterministic time-
only grids as in the one-dimensional example. In the experiments below, ART-RL is trained and distilled
separately for each K.




Figure 5: Empirical mean of the executed control θ and its 99 percent confidence interval for ART-RL trained
on CIFAR–10 with K “ 18.



                                                       22
6.3.1   Heun sampling

   We first evaluate the distilled ART-RL schedules under the sampling configuration that is most relevant
in modern image-generation pipelines. In particular, the default EDM pipeline uses Heun, instead of Euler,
and higher-order solvers of this type are widely adopted in practice because they provide improved accuracy
per function evaluation. Accordingly, we now evaluate Uniform, DPM, EDM, and ART-RL schedules on
CIFAR–10 under the EDM pipeline with the Heun-based sampler, keeping all other components fixed so
that differences in FID reflect only the effect of the timestep schedule.
   We consider step counts K P t2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 18u and follow the EDM implementation choice of using an
Euler step for the final update. With Heun updates, each intermediate step requires two score evaluations;
so the overall cost is NFE “ 2K ´ 1. In particular, K “ 18 corresponds to the strongest configuration
reported by EDM for CIFAR–10 and is included as a budget-matched comparison.
   Figure 3(c) and Table 2 show that ART-RL consistently achieves the best FID across all tested budgets.
The improvement is especially pronounced at small to moderate NFEs, where ART-RL outperforms all
hand-designed baselines by clear margins. Among the latter, DPM is slightly better than EDM at NFE “ 5,
while EDM becomes better from NFE “ 9 onward. Both, however, remain consistently worse than ART-RL
throughout. The outperformance of ART-RL persists even at the largest budget, which is also the strongest
configuration reported by Karras et al. (2022): at NFE “ 35, ART-RL achieves 1.82 versus 1.85 for EDM.
The robustness of the result at NFE “ 35 is further supported by three additional matched runs (with 50,000
samples each), which give FIDs 1.82, 1.79, 1.82 for ART-RL versus 1.85, 1.83, 1.85 for EDM respectively.

Table 2: FID versus number of function evaluations (NFE) on CIFAR–10 under Heun updates in EDM
pipeline.

                     NFE                3         5         9       13         19       35
                     Uniform      280.29     254.47   213.13    191.69      168.87   118.02
                     DPM          465.83     244.50    52.29      8.67        2.76     1.89
                     EDM          465.83     305.15    35.54      6.79        2.54     1.85
                     ART-RL      152.86     130.48    32.13      5.44        2.45     1.82


   Visual samples provided in Figure 6 show consistent results. Uniform schedules produce visibly blurrier
images even at larger budgets, while EDM and ART-RL generate sharp samples once sufficient numbers
of evaluations are available. At the smallest budgets (NFE“ 3, 5), ART-RL already produces recognizable
images, whereas EDM outputs remain closer to noise.




                                                      23
         (a) Uniform                      (b) DPM                      (c) EDM                   (d) ART-RL

Figure 6: CIFAR–10 samples across timesteps for the four schedules (Uniform, DPM, EDM, ART-RL). Each
panel shows a 6 ˆ 6 grid where rows correspond to increasing NFE.


    Under Heun sampling, these results show that ART-RL can be deployed as a drop-in replacement for the
EDM time grid within a competitive image-sampling pipeline. It improves the sampler substantially in low-
and mid-computation regimes while preserving strong performance at larger budgets.


6.3.2    Euler sampling

    To complement the Heun results, we also evaluate the distilled ART-RL schedules under Euler updates
within the same EDM pipeline, thereby matching the Euler discretization used during ART-RL training.
As in the one-dimensional experiment, sampling proceeds with K discrete Euler updates. In this case
each update requires one score evaluation; so NFE “ K. We evaluate representative step budgets K P
t2, 3, 5, 7, 12, 30, 50, 80u.
    Figure 3(b) and Table 3 show that ART-RL consistently achieves the best FID across all tested budgets,
with clear margins over all the baselines. Under Euler updates, EDM is slightly better than DPM at smaller
budgets, while DPM becomes slightly better at larger budgets. However, both are consistently worse than
ART-RL. This shows that the benefit of learning the time grid persists in a high-dimensional image model
where the score is learned from data, even when ART-RL is used only by replacing the grid at which the
same EDM reverse dynamics are evaluated. Additional 6ˆ6 visual results for the Euler ablation are provided
in Appendix A.3.1, Figure 9.

Table 3: FID versus number of function evaluations (NFE) on CIFAR–10 under Euler updates in EDM
pipeline.

                 NFE                 2        3         5         7       12       30      50      80
                 Uniform         280.50   255.02    214.60    194.40   162.14    85.83   53.40   34.99
                 DPM             295.65   125.67     51.73     27.07    11.35     3.95    2.86    2.41
                 EDM             295.65   122.56     49.10     27.73    11.91     4.21    3.01    2.50
                 ART-RL         109.11    86.84     28.16     23.88     7.84     3.46    2.63    2.28




                                                             24
6.4    MNIST with small score model

   We next consider MNIST – a deliberately simple setting in which the score network is lightweight (ap-
proximately 4.5 MB), trained from scratch, and much less optimized than the pretrained image-generation
models used in the EDM experiments. This experiment is not part of the EDM pipeline and is not meant
as a cross-dataset transfer test. Instead, it asks whether schedule learning remains useful when the score
model itself is small and less accurate instead of large and optimally pretrained. Such compact score models
are common in latency- or memory-limited deployments; so it is important to understand whether timestep
adaptation continues to improve sampling quality in this regime.
   Again, to isolate the effect of the time grid, all the methods use exactly the same small score network
and the same numerical integrator. Moreover, in this experiment we use the RK4 setting (see, e.g., Wu et al.
2024) to test whether the learned schedule remains effective under an ODE solver that has an order higher
than Heun. Following the EDM/Heun sampling convention, we use RK4 for the non-terminal updates and
retain an Euler step for the final update, which gives NFE “ 4K ´ 3. We then compare Uniform, DPM,
EDM, and ART-RL schedules under identical training and sampling configurations. In short, the timestep
schedule is the only component that differs across the methods under comparison.
   Figure 3(d) and Table 4 show that ART-RL achieves the lowest LeNet-FID at every reported evaluation
budget. The advantage is consistent across the full NFE range, indicating that the learned timestep allocation
remains effective when the score model is compact. Figure 11 in Appendix A.4 further illustrates that ART-
RL produces coherent digit samples earlier than the hand-crafted schedules.

               Table 4: LeNet-FID versus number of function evaluations (NFE) on MNIST.

                      NFE               5        9        17       25         37      69
                      Uniform     981.13    953.74   876.58    783.65   632.26     290.46
                      DPM         523.60    334.44     2.01      1.97     1.20       1.12
                      EDM         523.60     59.36     2.66      1.23     1.14       1.12
                      ART-RL     102.13      3.62     1.25      1.09     1.03       0.98


   The MNIST experiment indicates that the advantage of ART-RL extends beyond modern large-model
pipelines. Indeed, here the gain over EDM and DPM is even larger, suggesting that learned timestep
allocation remains effective even with simple, less optimized score-models.


6.5    Transfer and amortization of ART-RL

   We next experiment on the transferability of the ART-RL time schedule beyond the exact configuration
in which it is learned. This question is central to the practical value of ART-RL: if the learned schedule had
to be retrained for every step count, dataset, or sampling pipeline, the offline training cost would be harder
to justify. So we study whether the same CIFAR–10 schedule can be amortized across a broad family of
settings, turning the learned policy into a fixed plug-in timestep grid. In each transfer experiment, ART-RL


                                                     25
leaves the pretrained model, backbone, solver, and implementation pipeline unchanged and replaces only the
hand-designed timestep schedule. Thus, this section tests the strongest practical form of the drop-in claim:
a schedule learned once in the CIFAR–10 EDM setting with a given time step budget is inserted directly
into other budgets, datasets and even the EDM2 pipeline, and still outperforms.
      The study has three parts. The first part focuses on intra-dataset flexibility: starting from the CIFAR–10
schedule learned at K “ 18 in Section 6.3, we construct schedules for other step counts via interpolation and
extrapolation. The second part tests cross-dataset transfer within the pixel-space EDM pipeline: we reuse the
same CIFAR–10 schedule on AFHQv2, FFHQ, and ImageNet–64 without any additional training. The third
part further tests transfer to the EDM2 Karras et al. (2024) pipeline on ImageNet–512. This setting changes
three aspects at once: it uses a more modern EDM2 backbone and sampling pipeline, operates in latent space
rather than pixel space, and evaluates high-resolution image generation. Together, these experiments assess
whether the learned time parametrization captures structure that persists not only across time budgets and
datasets, but also across pipelines, resolutions, and representation spaces.
      In this subsection, we restrict attention to DPM, EDM, and ART-RL. The Uniform grid is substantially
worse in the corresponding image settings and is therefore omitted.


6.5.1      Transfer across timestep counts on CIFAR–10

      We first examine whether the ART-RL schedule learned at K “ 18 can be reused at other step counts.
All the experiments follow the same CIFAR–10 EDM-pipeline configuration as in Section 6.3. For ART-RL,
we take the learned K “ 18 sampling grid and generate new grids for K 1 P t4, 6, 9, 12, 15, 20u by log-linear
                                                                               pKq               pKq
resampling of the remaining-time values T ´ψ. Specifically, let 0 “ ψ0               ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă ψK      “ T denote the learned
K-step grid, where the superscript indicates the step count. For j “ 0, . . . , K 1 ´ 1, set rj “ jpK ´ 1q{K 1 ,
                                             pK 1 q                                       pKq                    pKq
ij “ trj u, and αj “ rj ´ ij , and define ψj          “ T ´ exptp1 ´ αj q logpT ´ ψij q ` αj logpT ´ ψij `1 qu, with
 pK 1 q
ψK 1      “ T . This is log-linear in T ´ ψ, and the same rule is used for interpolation to smaller step counts
K ă K and extrapolation to larger step counts K 1 ą K. For EDM, the timestep sequence at each K is
  1


computed directly from its analytic rule.
      Figure 3(e) and Table 5 show that the K “ 18 ART-RL schedule transfers smoothly across different
timestep counts. ART-RL still achieves the best FID for all the reported NFEs, outperforming both EDM
and DPM after interpolation and extrapolation of the learned schedule. This suggests that the learned time
parametrization captures a stable allocation pattern that remains effective under changes in grid resolution.

Table 5: FID versus number of function evaluations (NFE) on CIFAR–10 for interpolated and extrapolated
timestep counts.

                             NFE               7         11        17     23         29         39
                             DPM         185.63       10.31    3.52     2.19    1.94      1.88
                             EDM          85.80       14.42    3.11     2.06    1.88      1.85
                             ART-RL      33.73        6.59     2.57     2.00    1.84      1.82



                                                              26
   Additional 6 ˆ 6 image grids for these interpolated and extrapolated schedules are provided in Appendix
A.3.2, Figure 10.


6.5.2   Cross-dataset transfer to AFHQv2, FFHQ, and ImageNet–64

   We next test cross-dataset transfer without retraining. For each target dataset and time step budget,
we keep the corresponding EDM pipeline unchanged, including the score network, solver configuration, and
all hyperparameters, and replace only the timestep grid by the ART-RL schedule learned on CIFAR–10 in
Section 6.3. The hand-designed baselines use their corresponding schedules at the same step counts, and the
NFE accounting follows the same convention as in the CIFAR–10 experiments.
   Figure 3(f)–(h), together with Table 6, show that the learned CIFAR–10 schedule transfers successfully to
all the three datasets. ART-RL achieves the lowest FID in every reported setting, suggesting that the learned
time parametrization remains effective as a drop-in grid replacement across different image distributions
under the same EDM pipeline.

Table 6: FID versus number of function evaluations (NFE) for cross-dataset transfer. The ART-RL schedule
is learned on CIFAR–10 and reused without retraining.

               Dataset         Method            3         5         9       13     19      35
                               DPM          375.76    321.59     67.64    9.77    3.44   2.15
               AFHQv2          EDM          375.76    266.02     27.88    7.56    2.99   2.11
                               ART-RL      243.48    194.79     20.48     6.12    2.85   2.07
                               DPM          466.76    340.51   113.87     15.94   5.25   2.66
               FFHQ            EDM          466.76    344.76    57.13     15.87   5.26   2.73
                               ART-RL      305.97    240.38    35.73     11.08    4.31   2.57
                               DPM          437.42    233.35     60.48    12.31   4.46   2.66
               ImageNet–64     EDM          437.42    248.32     35.32     8.18   3.68   2.57
                               ART-RL      147.21    108.47     29.49     7.01    3.62   2.56



6.5.3   Transfer to EDM2 on ImageNet–512

   We further evaluate whether the learned ART-RL schedule transfers beyond the pixel-space EDM pipeline.
Specifically, we test ImageNet–512 under the EDM2 pipeline, which uses a latent-space diffusion model rather
than directly operating in pixel space. We use the extra-small (XS) EDM2 ImageNet–512 model. As before,
we keep the score model, solver configuration, and all hyperparameters fixed, and compare only the timestep
schedules.
   Figure 3(i) and Table 7 show that ART-RL continues to outperform both EDM and DPM under the EDM2
pipeline. The same conclusion holds also under Inception Score: ART-RL attains higher scores than both
EDM and DPM at every reported budget; see Appendix A.2, Table 8. This provides the strongest transfer test
in our study: the schedule learned from CIFAR–10 under the EDM pipeline remains effective when moved to
a different backbone, a different sampling pipeline, a latent representation, and a substantially higher image


                                                     27
resolution. Importantly, this EDM2 experiment still changes only the timestep grid; the pretrained EDM2
model and the rest of the sampling pipeline are left intact. Thus, this ImageNet–512 experiment answers
affirmatively whether ART-RL remains useful in a modern high-resolution diffusion setting.

Table 7: FID versus number of function evaluations (NFE) on ImageNet–512 under the EDM2 pipeline using
the XS model.

                        NFE              3         5            9      13      19     35
                        DPM         392.19    297.26         99.38   17.86   5.92   3.82
                        EDM         392.19    213.45         47.33   12.91   5.19   3.74
                        ART-RL     256.13    176.50         26.78    9.73    4.94   3.73




             (a) DPM                              (b) EDM                                  (c) ART-RL

Figure 7: ImageNet–512 samples under the EDM2 pipeline for the three schedules (DPM, EDM, ART-RL).
Each panel shows samples at increasing NFEs.



7     Conclusion
    This paper introduces and develops ART, a control-theoretic framework, for timestep allocation in score-
based diffusion sampling. While ART features a deterministic optimal control problem, solving it via the
conventional HJB equations is insurmountable due to the typical (ultra) high dimensions of the state space
with most generative AI tasks. We remedy the problem by introducing ART-RL, which is an auxiliary
problem with a particular class of Gaussian policies, and establishing a precise relationship between the two
problems. The ART-RL problem can be solved algorithmically à la the recently developed continuous-time
reinforcement learning theory including policy evaluation and policy improvement. It is noteworthy that
here ART-RL serves as a technical device to solve ART, rather than a prescription for exploration due to
model uncertainty.
    Existing time allocation schedules are mostly hand-crafted and ad hoc to the underlying tasks. As
a result, they do not necessarily work across different types of tasks. For instance, it is shown in this
paper that EDM, the state-of-the-art pipeline for image generation, works poorly for a very simple one-


                                                       28
dimensional example with a known score. By contrast, ART is a principled approach premised upon a
rigorous theory encompassing general diffusion generative jobs. This is validated by our empirical study:
the learned time schedules improve sample quality at matched evaluation budgets across different tasks and
numerical solvers, including Euler, Heun, and RK4. They also generalize across timestep counts, datasets,
sampling pipelines, and representation spaces. In particular, the experimentally demonstrated transferability
of ART has important practical implications. Once a schedule is learned and distilled in image generation,
ART has the same inference-time form as EDM or DPM; hence its offline training cost is amortized across
many downstream sampling settings.
   Remarks on possible future directions are in order. Our analysis is restricted to probability flow ODE
sampling, and extending the formulation to SDE samplers may lead to different allocation behaviors and
new theoretical questions. The current objective is motivated by an Euler local error surrogate; it would be
interesting to investigate alternative criteria, including surrogates aligned with higher-order integrators, to
better connect the control principle to practical solvers. Finally, while distillation to time-only schedules is
effective in our experiments, it removes state dependence as a consequence, and it is not yet clear if/when
richer state-conditioned schedules may provide additional benefits. Overall, ART and ART-RL offer a
first step toward a systematic, theory-grounded design of timestep schedules for diffusion-based generative
modeling.



Acknowledgments
   Yilie Huang acknowledges financial support from the Start-up Fund of The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University (Project ID: P0063874). Wenpin Tang is supported by NSF CAREER Award DMS-2538791 and
the Tang Family Assistant Professorship. Xun Yu Zhou is supported by the Nie Center for Intelligent Asset
Management at Columbia University. Wenpin Tang and Xun Yu Zhou are also part of a Columbia-CityU/HK
collaborative project that is supported by the InnoHK Initiative, The Government of the HKSAR, and the
AIFT Lab.




                                                      29
References
Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Arnaud Doucet, and George Deligiannidis. Nearly d-linear convergence
  bounds for diffusion models via stochastic localization. In ICLR, 2024.

Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling: User-
  friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In ICML, pages 4735–4763, 2023a.

Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Sampling is as easy as
  learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. In ICLR, 2023b.

Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis for
  multiple domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2020.

Xuefeng Gao, Jiale Zha, and Xun Yu Zhou. Reward-directed score-based diffusion models via q-learning.
  2024. arXiv:2409.04832.

Google. State-of-the-art video and image generation with veo 2 and imagen 3. https://blog.google/
  technology/google-labs/video-image-generation-update-december-2024/, 2024. Accessed: 2025-
  09-17.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Neurips, volume 33,
  pages 6840–6851, 2020.

Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Jiaoyang Huang, and Zhengjiang Lin. Convergence analysis of probability flow ode
  for score-based generative models. 2025a. arXiv:2404.09730. To appear in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory.

Yilie Huang. Continuous-time reinforcement learning for asset–liability management. In Proceedings of the
  6th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pages 360–368, 2025.

Yilie Huang and Xun Yu Zhou. Data-driven exploration for a class of continuous-time linear–quadratic
  reinforcement learning problems. 2025. arXiv:2507.00358.

Yilie Huang, Yanwei Jia, and Xunyu Zhou. Achieving mean–variance efficiency by continuous-time rein-
  forcement learning. In Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pages
  377–385, 2022.

Yilie Huang, Yanwei Jia, and Xun Yu Zhou. Mean–variance portfolio selection by continuous-time reinforce-
  ment learning: Algorithms, regret analysis, and empirical study. 2024. arXiv:2412.16175.

Yilie Huang, Yanwei Jia, and Xun Yu Zhou. Sublinear regret for a class of continuous-time linear-quadratic
  reinforcement learning problems. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 63(5):3452–3474, 2025b.



                                                    30
Yanwei Jia and Xun Yu Zhou. Policy evaluation and temporal-difference learning in continuous time and
  space: A martingale approach. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23(154):1–55, 2022a.

Yanwei Jia and Xun Yu Zhou. Policy gradient and actor-critic learning in continuous time and space: Theory
  and algorithms. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23(154):1–55, 2022b.

Yanwei Jia and Xun Yu Zhou. q-learning in continuous time. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 24(161):1–61, 2023.

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial
  networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
  4401–4410, 2019.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based
  generative models. In Neurips, volume 35, pages 26565–26577, 2022.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Jaakko Lehtinen, Janne Hellsten, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Analyzing and
  improving the training dynamics of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 24174–24184, 2024.

Samar Khanna, Siddhant Kharbanda, Shufan Li, Harshit Varma, Eric Wang, Sawyer Birnbaum, Ziyang
  Luo, Yanis Miraoui, Akash Palrecha, and Stefano Ermon. Mercury: Ultra-fast language models based on
  diffusion. 2025. arXiv:2506.17298.

Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 12, 1999.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to docu-
  ment recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 2002.

Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with polynomial
  complexity. In Neurips, volume 35, pages 22870–22882, 2022.

Gen Li and Yuling Yan. Adapting to unknown low-dimensional structures in score-based diffusion models.
  In Neurips, volume 37, pages 126297–126331, 2024.

Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, and Yuejie Chi. Towards faster non-asymptotic convergence for diffusion-
  based generative models. In ICLR, 2024.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast ode solver
  for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 35:5775–5787, 2022.



                                                   31
Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang, Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen,
  and Chongxuan Li. Large language diffusion models. 2025. arXiv:2502.09992.

OpenAI. Sora: Creating video from text. https://openai.com/sora, 2024. Accessed: 2025-09-17.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional
  image generation with clip latents. 2022. arXiv:2204.06125.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution
  image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, pages 10684–10695, 2022.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, An-
  drej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, and Michael Bernstein. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge.
  International journal of computer vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.

Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron
  Ashual, and Oran Gafni. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. In ICLR, 2023.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR, 2021a.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution. In
  Neurips, volume 32, page 11918–11930, 2019.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole.
  Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In ICLR, 2021b.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT press
  Cambridge, 1998.

Wenpin Tang and Hanyang Zhao. Score-based diffusion models via stochastic differential equations. Statistics
  Surveys, 19:28–64, 2025.

Wenpin Tang and Xun Yu Zhou.          Regret of exploratory policy improvement and q-learning.        2024.
  arXiv:2411.01302.

Haoran Wang, Thaleia Zariphopoulou, and Xun Yu Zhou. Reinforcement learning in continuous time and
  space: A stochastic control approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(198):1–34, 2020.

Yuchen Wu, Yuxin Chen, and Yuting Wei. Stochastic Runge-Kutta methods: Provable acceleration of
  diffusion models. 2024. arXiv:2410.04760.

Qinsheng Zhang and Yongxin Chen. Fast sampling of diffusion models with exponential integrator. In ICLR,
  2023.




                                                    32
Qinsheng Zhang, Jiaming Song, and Yongxin Chen. Improved order analysis and design of exponential
  integrator for diffusion models sampling. 2023. arXiv:2308.02157.

Hanyang Zhao, Wenpin Tang, and David D Yao. Policy optimization for continuous reinforcement learning.
  In Neurips, volume 36, 2023.

Hanyang Zhao, Haoxian Chen, Ji Zhang, David Yao, and Wenpin Tang. Scores as Actions: a framework of
  fine-tuning diffusion models by continuous-time reinforcement learning. 2024. arXiv:2409.08400.

Hanyang Zhao, Haoxian Chen, Ji Zhang, David Yao, and Wenpin Tang. Score as Action: Fine tuning
  diffusion generative models by continuous-time reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2025.




                                                   33
A      Additional Numerical Results

A.1     Results for One–Dimensional Study

    Figure 8 shows the empirical mean of the executed control θ together with the 99 percent confidence
band computed from the last 10,000 trajectories in the one–dimensional experiment reported in Subsection
6.2. As in the main text, each trajectory is normalized so that the induced terminal time satisfies ψpT q “ T .
The confidence band is extremely narrow and visually indistinguishable from the mean curve, confirming
that in this setting the learned control exhibits negligible variability across trajectories and can be treated
as an effectively deterministic function of time.




Figure 8: Empirical mean of the executed control θ and its 99 percent confidence interval, based on the last
10,000 trajectories in the one–dimensional experiment.



A.2     Additional ImageNet–512 Inception Score Results

    Table 8 reports the Inception Score for the ImageNet–512 EDM2 experiment.

  Table 8: Inception Score versus NFE on ImageNet–512 under the EDM2 pipeline using the XS model.

                       NFE             3      5         9       13         19        35

                       DPM          1.58   1.82     20.17   106.78    175.94     205.48
                       EDM          1.58   4.19     53.10   129.75    186.40     206.49
                       ART-RL      4.15    7.50     79.68   147.40   188.28     207.37



A.3     Additional qualitative results for CIFAR–10

    This appendix collects qualitative grids for CIFAR–10 that complement the quantitative results in Sec-
tion 6.3.2 (Euler ablation) and Section 6.5.1 (interpolation and extrapolation across timestep counts).




                                                       34
A.3.1    Euler ablation grids

   Figure 9 shows qualitative results for the Euler ablation in Section 6.3.2, comparing Uniform, EDM,
and ART-RL under the same Euler-based sampler. The ART-RL schedule tends to produce recognizable
structure earlier at small budgets, consistent with the FID values reported in the main text.




        (a) Uniform                  (b) DPM                     (c) EDM                   (d) ART-RL

Figure 9: CIFAR–10 samples across evaluation budgets under Euler updates. Each panel shows a 8 ˆ 6 grid
where rows correspond to increasing NFE.


A.3.2    Interpolation and extrapolation grids

   Figure 10 reports qualitative results for the interpolation and extrapolation study in Section 6.5.1. We
reuse the schedule learned at K “ 18 and construct grids for other timestep counts via log-linear interpolation
and extrapolation, while DPM and EDM are computed from their analytic rules at each K.




             (a) DPM                               (b) EDM                             (c) ART-RL

Figure 10: CIFAR–10 samples across evaluation budgets for interpolated and extrapolated timestep counts.
Each panel shows a 6 ˆ 6 grid where rows correspond to increasing NFE.




                                                      35
A.4    Additional qualitative results for MNIST

   Figure 11 provides qualitative grids for the MNIST small-model experiment in Section 6.4. The DPM
grid is included together with Uniform, EDM, and ART-RL so that the visual comparison matches the
quantitative table in the main text.




       (a) Uniform                     (b) DPM                 (c) EDM                   (d) ART-RL

Figure 11: MNIST samples across timesteps for the four schedules (Uniform, DPM, EDM, ART-RL). Each
panel shows a 6 ˆ 6 grid where rows correspond to increasing NFE.


A.5    Additional qualitative transfer results

   Figures 12–14 provide qualitative grids for the cross-dataset transfer experiments in Section 6.5.2.




             (a) DPM                             (b) EDM                             (c) ART-RL

Figure 12: AFHQv2 samples across timesteps for the three schedules (DPM, EDM, ART-RL). Each panel
shows a 6 ˆ 6 grid where rows correspond to increasing NFE.




                                                     36
           (a) DPM                          (b) EDM                        (c) ART-RL

Figure 13: FFHQ samples across timesteps for the three schedules (DPM, EDM, ART-RL). Each panel
shows a 6 ˆ 6 grid where rows correspond to increasing NFE.




           (a) DPM                          (b) EDM                        (c) ART-RL

Figure 14: ImageNet–64 samples across timesteps for the three schedules (DPM, EDM, ART-RL). Each
panel shows a 6 ˆ 6 grid where rows correspond to increasing NFE.




                                              37
