                                        Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                                        Dynamic Neural Graph Encoding of Inference Processes in
                                        Deep Weight Space

                                        Di Wu                                                                                       E1538518@u.nus.edu
                                        University of Toronto
                                        National University of Singapore

                                        Huan Liu∗                                                                                   liuh127@outlook.com
                                        McMaster University

                                        Zhixiang Chi
arXiv:2607.02166v1 [cs.LG] 2 Jul 2026




                                        University of Toronto

                                        Yuanhao Yu
                                        McMaster University

                                        Konstantinos N. Plataniotis
                                        University of Toronto

                                        Yang Wang
                                        Concordia University

                                        Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= 4fweEyVYLF



                                                                                           Abstract

                                                  The rapid advancements in using neural networks as implicit data representations have
                                                  attracted significant interest in developing machine learning methods that analyze and pro-
                                                  cess the weight spaces of other neural networks. However, efficiently handling these high-
                                                  dimensional weight spaces remains challenging. Existing methods often overlook the sequen-
                                                  tial nature of layer-by-layer processing in neural network inference. In this work, we propose
                                                  a novel approach using dynamic graphs to represent neural network parameters, capturing
                                                  the temporal dynamics of inference. Our Dynamic Neural Graph Encoder (DNG-Encoder)
                                                  processes these graphs, preserving the sequential nature of neural processing. Addition-
                                                  ally, we also leverage DNG-Encoder to develop INR2JLS (Implicit Neural Representation to
                                                  Joint Latent Space) for facilitate downstream applications, such as classifying Implicit Neu-
                                                  ral Representations (INRs). Our approach demonstrates significant improvements across
                                                  multiple tasks, surpassing the state-of-the-art INR classification accuracy by approximately
                                                  10% on the CIFAR-100-INR. Our code is available at https://github.com/dddiowww/DNG.


                                        1     Introduction

                                        Deep neural networks have demonstrated superb capability in addressing real-world problems in fields such
                                        as computer vision, natural language processing, and the natural sciences. While it is generally used for
                                        learning patterns from data, recent studies have expanded its scope by treating neural networks themselves
                                        as inputs, enabling tasks such as optimizing networks (Metz et al., 2022), predicting the labels of the data
                                        encoded in implicit neural representations (Dupont et al., 2022), and generating or modifying their weights
                                        to alter functionality (Schürholt et al., 2022). However, processing these weight spaces presents considerable
                                        challenges due to their complex, high-dimensional nature.
                                            ∗ Research Lead. Corresponding Author.




                                                                                                1
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




To address the difficulty, some existing methods propose to narrow the effective weight space using a restricted
training process (Bauer et al., 2023; De Luigi et al., 2023). However, this neglects the crucial permutation
symmetry property of the neural network weights, i.e., neurons within a layer can be rearranged without al-
tering the network’s function (Hecht-Nielsen, 1989). Overlooking the permutation symmetry can significantly
increase the search space for optimal parameters of processing network, resulting in reduced generalization
and unsatisfactory performance. By observing this, recent works (Navon et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024a;b)
build permutation equivariant weight-space models named neural functionals. Unfortunately, these methods
need manual adaptation for each new architecture, and a single model can only handle one fixed architecture.
To enable processing heterogeneous architectures, Kofinas et al. (2024) and Lim et al. (2024) introduce to
model neural network weights as graphs, which links neural network parameters similarly to a computation
graph. These methods, while innovative, predominantly employ static graphs. This static representation
allows GNNs to process the entire graph in a single pass. However, such an approach overlooks a critical
aspect of neural network behavior during inference: the sequential nature of layer-by-layer processing. Neu-
ral networks, by design, perform inferences in a temporally ordered manner. This sequential dependency
suggests that a more natural and effective modeling of neural network parameters could be achieved by
dynamic graphs. Unlike static graphs, dynamic graphs evolve over time, capturing the temporal dynamics
inherent in the forward pass process.
Motivated by these observations, we propose a novel method that represents neural network parameters as
dynamic graphs, namely dynamic neural graphs. Leveraging this dynamic graph, we introduce the Dynamic
Neural Graph Encoder (DNG-Encoder), a recurrent-like graph neural network designed to process dynamic
neural graphs. This approach mirrors the forward propagation mechanism of neural networks, preserving the
temporal characteristics of the data flow through the layers. To facilitate downstream applications, we use
the DNG-Encoder to develop INR2JLS, a method that learns a joint latent space between deep weights and
the original data. This approach provides a more informative latent space compared to previous methods
that focused solely on deep weight space.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows. First, we introduce the concept of dynamic neural graphs
for modeling neural network parameters, capturing the temporal dynamics of the forward pass. Second,
we develop a novel RNN-based graph neural network to process these dynamic graphs, effectively imitating
the sequential nature of neural network inference. Third, we propose INR2JLS, a technique that maps INR
weights into a joint latent space that can benefit downstream applications. Finally, we show through extensive
experiments the effectiveness of our method across three tasks. Notably, the performance of our method
improves over the state-of-the-art by 9% and 10% on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 for INR classification.

2   Related Work

Dynamic Graphs. Dynamic graphs are categorized into discrete-time (DTDGs) and continuous-time
(CTDGs) types. DTDGs consist of graph snapshots at regular intervals, each treated as a static graph,
while CTDGs evolve through an initial static state and a sequence of timestamped events. To capture
both structural and temporal information, dynamic graph neural networks have been widely studied, often
employing an encoder-decoder framework (Kazemi et al., 2020), where the encoder learns node embeddings
and the decoder performs downstream tasks. A key approach to handling dynamic graphs involves using
recurrent neural networks to model temporal dependencies. Notable methods for DTDGs include Seo et al.
(2018); Chen et al. (2022), while CTDGs have been addressed by Trivedi et al. (2017; 2019).
Implicit Neural Representations. Recent works employ a neural network as a continuous function to
implicitly represent the objects or shapes (Genova et al., 2019; Gropp et al., 2020). This function takes an
input (often a point coordinate) and outputs the corresponding feature value or property. SIREN (Sitzmann
et al., 2020) is a continuous implicit neural representation that utilizes sine as a periodic activation function.
It excels at fitting complex signals, including natural images and 3D shapes. In our experiments, the INRs
in the datasets we used are in the form of SIRENs.
Learning in Deep Weight Spaces. Weight Space Learning has recently been formalized as a unified
paradigm that treats neural network parameters as a structured data modality (Han et al., 2026b). The high-
dimensional weight spaces of implicit neural representations (INRs) pose challenges for extracting meaningful


                                                        2
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Figure 1: An illustration of the limitations of static neural graph processing. In deeper layers, updated nodes
may incorporate undesired information, such as W2 b1 in (a).


information. Some works address this by constraining training to narrow the effective weight space (Bauer
et al., 2023; De Luigi et al., 2023), but Navon et al. (2023) and Zhou et al. (2024a) highlight that such methods
often overlook permutation symmetry in neural weights, which can hinder generalization. To mitigate this,
they proposed permutation-equivariant weight-space models, with further performance enhancement via
transformer-based architectures (Zhou et al., 2024b). Beyond permutation, recent research such as W2T
(Han et al., 2026a) underscores the necessity of resolving inherent reparameterization symmetries through
canonical representations to accurately decode model behavior from weights. However, these methods require
manual adaptation, limiting scalability. To generalize across architectures, Kofinas et al. (2024) and Lim
et al. (2024) model neural weights as graphs, leveraging graph neural networks (GNNs) for a symmetry-aware
and expressive approach. While effective, these methods rely on static graphs and positional encoding to
capture layer hierarchy (Andreis et al., 2024). In this paper, we extend this paradigm by incorporating the
temporal nature of neural inference. We propose transforming neural networks into dynamic graphs and
applying temporal graph neural networks to better capture inter-layer dependencies.

3     Preliminaries on Neural Graph

3.1   Neural Networks as Static Neural Graph

Neural graphs (Kofinas et al., 2024) have been introduced as a graph-like representation of neural network
weights. For example, in an L-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) M, the weight matrices are denoted as
{W1 , W2 , ..., WL }, and the biases are denoted as {b1 , b2 , ..., bL }. Each weight matrix Wl and bias bl
respectively have dimensions dl × dl−1 and dl . M can be converted to a neural graph G = (V, E), where
V = {v0 , v1 , ..., vL } denotes the set of nodes features, and E = {e1 , e2 , ..., eL } represents the set of edges
                     l                 l  l−1
features. vl ∈ Rd ×dv and el ∈ Rd ×d ×de are the nodes and edges of the l-th layer in G, where dv and
de represent the dimensions of the node feature and the edge feature. In addition, vl and el correspond to
neurons at the l-th layer of M and connections between neurons at the l-th layer and the (l − 1)-th layer
of M. Typically, edge features contain matrix weights, while node features are constructed using biases.
Frequency representations, such as Random Fourier Features (RFFs), have shown improved performance on
weights and biases (Zhou et al., 2024a;b). Notably, once defined, the graph structure remains fixed, thus
constituting a static neural graph.

3.2   Expressivity of Processing Neural Graphs with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)

A recent study (Navon et al., 2023) suggests that if a model can simulate the forward pass of its input neural
network, it can match that network’s expressive power. Following this, Kofinas et al. (2024) employs GNNs
in the form of message passing neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017).


                                                         3
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                                                       0
Consider an L-layer network M with input x ∈ Rd . Its first-layer activation for neuron i is
                                                    X
                                      ai1 = σ(b1i +     Wij1
                                                             xj ).                                               (1)
                                                               j


Meanwhile, an MPNN with K layers (often K = L) processes node and edge features vl (k) and el (k). The
first MPNN layer’s message-passing update is
                                                                                     
                                                  X
                          vi1 (1) = ϕ1u vi1 (0),   ϕ1m (vi1 (0) , e1ij (0) , vj0 (0)) ,           (2)
                                                   j∈Ni

where i and j represent the index of the target node and the source node. Ni represents the neighbors of
node vi . Please note that vi1 (0), e1ij (0), and vj0 (0) are the initial representations directly derived from b1i ,
  1
Wij , and xj , respectively. For simplicity, here we assume these indices match thoes of network parameters.
By comparing the Equation 1 and 2, it can be found that the MPNN can approximate the feed-forward
procedures on input networks of the first layer in MPNN as follows. The function ϕ1m is the message function
of the first MPNN layer, capable of approximating the product Wij 1
                                                                    xj . The function ϕ1u represents the node
update function of the first MPNN layer. It can easily approximate the operation of adding b1i to Wij1
                                                                                                       xj and
applying the activation function σ. Thus, the MPNN can effectively approximate the feed-forward process
of the input network.

3.3    Limitations of Static Neural Graphs

In standard neural networks, inference proceeds sequentially: each layer depends on the outputs of all prior
layers. By contrast, in a static neural graph, each node can only aggregate information from adjacent
layers, contradicting the true layer-by-layer dependency. Moreover, we also identify a significant issue when
employing multi-layer graph neural networks discussed below.
Following the message-passing process of the first MPNN layer on the first set of MLP nodes in Equation
2, the message-passing  process of the first  MPNN layer on the second set of MLP 1nodes is1 as vi (1) =
                                                                                                     2

ϕu (vi (0), j∈Ni ϕm vi (0) , eij (0) , vj (0) ). Since this graph update uses the same ϕu and ϕm as those in
 1   2            1   2       2         1
           P

Equation 2, according to the expressivity of GNN, each node vi2 (1) in the second layer of the MLP should
be updated to b2i + Wi2 b1 . For clarity, we omit including σ.
Now, we move to the secondP layer2 of 2MPNN.     When we examine the update of node vi2 (2) in this layer, we
have: vi (2) = ϕu (vi (1), j∈Ni ϕm (vi (1), eij (1), vj1 (1))). Again, we can assume this calculation completes:
        2       2    2                       2

b2i + Wi2 b1 + Wi2 (b1i + Wi1 x), where part (b) is approximated by ϕ2m , and adding part (a) to (b) is done
|    {z    } |         {z      }
      (a)                  (b)
by ϕ2u . However, if we strictly follow the forward pass of neural network, the desired computation should
be: b2i + Wi2 (b1i + Wi1 x). In this case, besides the approximation of addition operation, ϕ2u needs to do
    |{z} |        {z      }
      (c)            (d)
additional work to extract b2i from the summarized result b2i + Wi2 b1 . This may seem like an easy task, but
technically it is not. Isolating b2i from b2i + Wi2 b1 is an ill-posed inverse problem, making training difficult
and often leading to suboptimal solutions. We show the problem in Figure 1 and further illustrate it with a
scalar example below.
Scalar example. Consider a 2-layer MLP with scalar parameters w1 =3, b1 =2, w2 =5, b2 =1, and input x.
The true forward pass (omitting σ for clarity) computes y = b2 + w2 (b1 + w1 x) = 1 + 5(2 + 3x). After the
first MPNN layer on the corresponding static neural graph:
                v 1 (1) = b1 + w1 x = 2 + 3x                       (correct first-layer activation),
                v (1) = b + w b = 1 + 10 = 11
                 2               2   2 1
                                                                   (undesired term w2 b1 = 10).
In the second MPNN layer, ϕ2u receives v 2 (1) = 11 and the message msg ≈ w2 (b1 + w1 x) = 5(2+3x). A
natural update, adding the node state to the message, yields 11 + 5(2+3x), which exceeds the desired result


                                                           4
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Figure 2: Left: static neural graph. Right: dynamic neural graph. A static neural graph has a fixed structure
and set of connections, while dynamic neural graph evolves over time, with changes in its structure and node
connections.

1 + 5(2+3x) by exactly w2 b1 = 10. Correcting this requires ϕ2u to recover b2 = 1 from the compound value
v 2 (1) = 11 = b2 + w2 b1 , but w2 b1 is not separately available as an input. Across different input MLPs, w2 b1
takes arbitrary values, so no fixed function of the scalar 11 can isolate b2 in general.

4     Neural Networks as Dynamic Graph

To address the limitations of static neural graphs, we convert neural networks into dynamic graphs. By inte-
grating the inherent temporal processing characteristics of neural networks into their graph representation,
subsequent models can more effectively capture and utilize these temporal relationships. In the following
sections, we discuss the conversion of both MLPs and CNNs into dynamic neural graphs.

4.1   MLPs as Dynamic Neural Graphs

We define a dynamic graph converted from an L-layer MLP M as a dynamic neural graph GT = (Gt0 , O[t1 :tL ] ),
where Gt0 only contains v0 that corresponds to inputs of M. The definitions of vl and el in the dynamic
neural graph are the same as those in the static neural graph from Section 3.1. Since the inputs to neural
networks are not fixed, we treat them as learnable vectors. To keep the dimensions of all node embeddings
consistent, we set their dimensions to be the same as the dimensions of the embeddings of other nodes.
We simulate the forward pass process of M by defining the graph update event O. We define four graph
operations, i.e., edge addition (+E), edge deletion (−E), node addition (+V ) and node deletion (−V ).
Specifically, a graph update event Otl at time tl is:
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                  {(+V, vl , tl ), (+E, el , tl )},    if l = 1,
                                 
                           Otl =                                                                       (3)
                                 
                                  {(+V, vl , tl ), (+E, el , tl ),
                                  (−V, vl−2 , tl ), (−E, el−1 , tl )}, if 1 < l ≤ L,
                                 

where (+V, vl , tl ) denotes adding the nodes vl to Gtl at tl . (+E, el , tl ) represents adding edges el to to Gtl at
timestamp tl . The edges el connect nodes vl−1 to the newly added nodes vl . When t1 < tl ≤ tL , we delete
nodes vl−2 and edges el−2 , and adding incoming nodes and edges.
Similar to many previous approaches to process weight space parameters (Zhou et al., 2024a;b; Kofinas et al.,
2024), we use the Random Fourier Features (RFFs) of weights Wl and biases bl in M to initialize vl and el .
By the above definition of O, the snapshot Gtl = ({vl−1 , vl }, el ) at timestamp tl can be considered a fully
connected static bipartite directed graph (Bang-Jensen & Gutin, 2008). This graph consists of two sets of
nodes, vl−1 and vl , with the direction of edges el from nodes vl−1 to nodes vl . In this way, the structure of
Gtl complies with the topology of the l-th forward pass step of M. To illustrate the procedure of converting
an MLP to a dynamic neural graph, we show an example in Figure 2.


                                                          5
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                                                        ...

                                                              ...


                                                                      ...
                                                        ...

                                                              ...


                                                                      ...
Figure 3: An illustration of multi-head message function, formalized in Equation 5. Each edge receives a
distinct message from the source node via separate heads. The aggregated message is computed by merging
all heads with an MLP.



4.2    CNNs as Dynamic Neural Graphs

Here, we introduce the procedure to convert convolutional layers and linear layers in CNNs to modules in
dynamic neural graphs. 1
                                                                                           l   l−1   l   l                  l
A 2D convolutional layer at the l-th level of the CNN includes filter Wl ∈ Rc ×c ×h ×w and bias bl ∈ Rc ,
where cl−1 and cl respectively denote the depth and the number of filters in the l-th convolutional layer.
Typically, cl−1 strictly matches the number of input channels, and cl controls the number of output channels.
hl and wl represent the width and height of the kernel.
Naturally, we can treat the biases as node features similarly to how we handle them in an MLP. However,
kernels cannot be treated as edge features in the same manner because their spatial dimensions differ from
those of MLP weights. To address this problem, we propose to treat each weight scalar as an independent
edge. Specifically, we construct edges between nodes of adjacent layers, vl−1 and vl , by a number of
cl−1 × cl × hl × wl edges, with each edge corresponding to a scalar in Wl and each pair of nodes is connected
by hl × wl edges. To maintain consistency in the number of edges between each pair of nodes within the
dynamic neural graph, we perform padding by adding additional zero edges between a pair of nodes to reach
the maximum of hl × wl .



5     Learning Invariant Latent Space on Dynamic Neural Graph

As discussed, modeling neural networks as dynamic graphs offers a natural alignment with the forward-pass
computation. However, a key challenge remains: how should such dynamic neural graphs be effectively
processed? Inspired by recent advances, notably the Temporal Graph Network (TGN) (Rossi et al.), we
develop a tailored RNN-based encoder for dynamic neural graphs, which we term the Dynamic Neural
Graph Encoder (DNG-Encoder). While this represents a foundational step, our approach opens the door to
exploring more advanced architectures for dynamic neural graph processing.
Message Passing. Inspired by the process of multiplying activations by weights in a DNN, we use the linear
complexity conditional scaling mechanism from FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) to define the Message Function
for the DNG-Encoder. Notably, unlike the original FiLM, we do not include information about the target
nodes and the shift module in our operation. This allows for a more faithful simulation of neural network
inference, ensuring that weights are only multiplied by the activations of the previous layer.



    1 Due to page limit, we discuss the procedures to convert flattening layers and residual connections in Appendix F.1.




                                                               6
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Below we present the Message Function for the case where there is only one edge between a pair of nodes
(i.e., for the dynamic neural graph converted by an MLP):
                                                          l
                                           mi (tl ) = ϕtm (sj (tl −), eij (tl ))
                                                               tl                tl
                                                      X
                                                    =       Wm1    eij (tl ) ⊙ Wm2  sj (tl −),                                     (4)
                                                       j∈Ni


where eij (tl ) denotes the edge between the target node vi and the source node vj at time tl . sj (tl −) represent
                                           tl        tl
the memories of vj just before time tl . Wm1   and Wm2  are two linear layers to perform linear transformations.
For a pair of nodes connected by multiple edges, say N edges (i.e. for the dynamic neural graph converted
by a CNN), we map the source node memory to N heads. Each head interacts with one edge to generate
multiple messages. Finally, we merge these messages through an MLP ϕh :

              X         l
                                                                  
 mi (tl ) =          ϕth Concat head1ij (tl ), . . . , headN
                                                           ij (t )
                                                                l
                                                                      ,
              j∈Ni
                                                                                                   l                 l
                                                                        where   headnij (tl ) = Wm1
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                    eij,n (tl ) ⊙ Wnt sj (tl −).   (5)


We illustrate the multi-head message passing function in Figure 3. It is worth noting that a similar operation,
referred to as “multiple towers" (Gilmer et al., 2017), was proposed to address the computational challenges
that arise when the dimensionality of node embeddings becomes excessively large. In contrast, our multi-
head message function is primarily designed to ensure that a source node can transmit N distinct messages
to a target node through N edges, thereby more effectively simulating the forward propagation process of a
convolutional layer.
Recurrent Memory Updating. Recent works (Thost & Chen, 2021; Zhang et al., 2018) have demonstrated
the effectiveness of using Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) to capture complex dependencies during node
representation updates. Inspired by these approaches, we similarly employ GRUs to update the memory of
target nodes vil , enabling the capture of sequential dependencies between the layers of neural networks:


                                                       l
                                         si (tl ) = ϕtu mi (tl ), vi (tl )
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                 (6)
                                                  = LayerNorm GRU mi (t ), vi (t ) .
                                                                            l   l
                                                                                  



Additionally, we incorporate layer normalization to stabilize the distribution of hidden state activations,
improving training stability. Since the proposed DNG-Encoder processes the dynamic graph in a sequential
manner, it differs from the MPNN used for static graphs (Kofinas et al., 2024). Therefore, we can avoid
the introduction of the “inverse problem" discussed in Section 3.3. Due to page limit, for a comprehensive
explanation of how we address these limitations, please refer to Appendix A.
It is worth mentioning that we do not update edge representations using the DNG-Encoder. For our dynamic
neural graph framework, each edge is only utilized for message passing at a specific timestamp. Other than
this timestamp, the edge is not included in the graph structure, meaning the same edge is not reused
for multiple message-passing steps. For example, in Figure 2 (right), the edges in Gt1 are not present in
the following processing timestamp. Therefore, updating edge features does not affect message passing
process of our model. Additionally, the introduced dynamic neural graph allows us to simplify the temporal
graph neural network framework by removing the message aggregator and embedding module, enhancing
computational efficiency. The main reason is that each node in our dynamic neural network interacts only
with the graph features at the current time, avoiding the memory staleness issue identified in Kazemi et al.
(2020), which is typically managed by the embedding module. This property also eliminates the need for a
memory aggregator to integrate messages received by a node from distinct events at various timestamps.


                                                                    7
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                              DNG-
                             Encoder




                                                      Latent
                                                     Generator




                                                                      Decoder



Figure 4: An overview of INR2JLS. Given the weights of an neural network, the DNG-Encoder processes the
weights as dynamic neural graph to obtain the last recurrent memory. This memory state is combined with
learnable spatial vectors in the Latent Generator to produce latent vectors, which are decoded into images
using a transposed convolutional Decoder. The framework enables learning a joint latent space that links
INR weights and image content without reconstructing the weights.


6   INR2JLS: Learning a Joint Latent Space from Data and Weights

Recent advancements in implicit neural representations (INRs) offer a novel approach to encoding contin-
uous signals like images by mapping spatial coordinates directly to signal values. In this section, we treat
INRs as specialized neural networks and develop an effective method to extract robust features for INR
classification. Existing methods such as INR2VEC (De Luigi et al., 2023) and INR2ARRAY (Zhou et al.,
2024b) have made great progress on the extracting representations from INRs for classification tasks. These
approaches use encoder-decoder architectures to map INR weights into a latent space and reconstruct the
INR weights. However, due to the high-dimensional nature of deep weights, this reconstruction process
increases optimization difficulty, potentially leading to poor convergence and suboptimal latent spaces.
To this end, we introduce INR2JLS, a novel framework that supports randomly initialized neural network
and provides a more informative latent space. Compared with the INR2VEC and INR2ARRAY, the main
innovation of our INR2JLS is that we introduce a joint latent space between deep weights and the original
data. To be specific, INR2JLS utilizes an encoder-decoder architecture to map INR weights to a latent
representation capable of capturing both spatial and semantic information inherent in the original image.
To achieve this, we do not decode the latent representations back to INR weights. Instead, we decode the
latent representation to the original image represented by the input INR. We provide an overview of INR2JLS
in Figure 4.
Our encoder, ENCθ , is built with the DNG-Encoder and a Latent Generator ϕg . By transforming the input
INR weights to dynamic neural graphs, we first employ DNG-Encoder to recurrently process the graph
and obtain the last recurrent memory s(tL ). As discussed earlier, s(tL ) should inherit all the information
contained in a complete forward pass of INR. However, we find that directly decoding an image from s(tL )
is extremely difficult. One potential reason is that s(tL ) may store very little spatial information of the
original image. Inspired by the positional encoding technique, we introduce a set of learnable spatial vectors
{θs1 , ..., θsN }, where N = hs × ws denotes the dimension of latent representation. For generating a single
latent vector, we have:
                                         Fn = ϕg (Concat(s(tL ), θsn )),                                    (7)

where Fn ∈ Rd is the feature vector at the index n. We conduct Equation 7 over all the set {θs1 , ..., θsN }. In
this way, we have a set of feature vectors {F1 , ..., FN }. Then, we reshape the set of feature vector to form a
3D feature map F ∈ Rhs ×ws ×d . Each latent vector in F corresponds to a spatial area in the original image.


                                                       8
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Finally, we use transposed convolutional layers as a decoder DECθ to decode F. The objective is to minimize
the difference between the decoded outputs and the original images Iimg . We use MSE as the loss function:

                                      L(θ, W) = MSE(DECθ (F), Iimg ),                                      (8)
                                     where   F = ENCθ (W).                                                 (9)

In image processing, implementing data augmentations is a common method to improve the generalization of
trained networks. Current data augmentation techniques for deep space processing either encode augmented
images into INRs (Kofinas et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a) or directly modify the INR weights (Shamsian
et al., 2024). With the proposed INR2JLS, we introduce a distinct augmentation method that can be easily
implemented in our framework. Specifically, we generate different views of the original images using the
decoder. By encouraging the INR2JLS to generate diverse views of the image Iimg , the model can learn
representations Faug that are more robust and invariant to such transformations. Detailed discussion can
be found in Appendix G.3.

7   Experiment for Comparing Static and Dynamic Neural Graph

To evaluate the ability of static and dynamic neural graph–based models to approximate the forward pass
of an input neural network, we compare their performance in fitting layer-wise activations of multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) of varying depth.
Data Generation. We first generate 1,000 three-layer MLPs with randomly sampled weights and biases as
training data, and another 500 structurally identical MLPs as testing data. For each MLP, we sample inputs
and record the activation values at every layer, resulting in a dataset of 1,500 MLPs with corresponding
activation trajectories.
Model Setup. Our goal is to use a message-passing neural network (MPNN) defined on either a static or
a dynamic neural graph to produce node embeddings that fit the target activations. A smaller mismatch
indicates a better approximation of the MLP’s forward computation. To ensure a fair comparison, both
graph variants adopt the same message function ϕm and node update function ϕu described in Section 3.2.
Specifically, ϕm concatenates the source node features with the edge features and maps them through a
two-layer MLP, while ϕu concatenates the aggregated incoming messages with the target node features and
processes them through another two-layer MLP.
For the static neural graph, we implement the L-layer MPNN framework of (Kofinas et al., 2024), which
uses an L-step message-passing process to mimic the forward propagation of an L-layer MLP, including their
edge update mechanism. For the dynamic neural graph, we follow the construction in Section 4.1, where
the graph evolves over timestamps to reflect the computation flow of the MLP, and node embeddings are
updated layer by layer using the same ϕm and ϕu .
Results. Figure 5 reports the MSE between predicted and ground-truth activations for MLPs with one,
two, and three layers on the test set. The dynamic neural graph–based model maintains consistently low
fitting error across all layers. In contrast, the static graph–based model performs similarly to the dynamic
model only for the first layer; its accuracy degrades noticeably from the second layer onward, with the gap
widening as depth increases.
These findings are consistent with our analysis in Section 3.3: the static neural graph framework in (Kofinas
et al., 2024) is effective primarily at approximating the first forward-pass step of the input neural network,
but struggles to capture computations in deeper layers. In comparison, our dynamic neural graph framework
successfully models all stages of the forward pass, enabling accurate approximation of the computation flow.

8   Experiments on Downstream Applications

We here conduct a comprehensive evaluation of our method in accordance with (Navon et al., 2023; Kofinas
et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a). This evaluation involves a series of experiments across two tasks, each
designed to utilize deep neural network weights as inputs. Specifically, the tasks are: (1) classifying INRs;


                                                      9
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Figure 5: The Mean Squared Error (MSE) for fitting the activations of each layer of an MLP using the static
neural graph-based model and the dynamic neural graph-based model, respectively.

                                 #Params      MNIST             FashionMNIST   CIFAR-10     CIFAR-100
          NFN                     ∼135M        92.9±0.38           75.6±1.07    46.6±0.13   20.55±0.93
          INR2ARRAY (NFT)         ∼59M         98.5±0.00           79.3±0.00    63.4±0.00   31.30±0.04
          NG-GNN                   ∼6M         97.3±0.02          86.53±0.58   55.11±1.43   26.50±1.32
          NG-T                     ∼6M        96.83±0.06          85.24±0.13    57.7±0.36   31.65±0.28
          INR2JLS (Ours)           ∼6M        98.6±0.01           90.6±0.07    73.2±0.28     42.4±0.32

Table 1: INR classification accuracy (%) using 10-view INR augmentation across datasets. #Params is
inference-time parameters. NG-GNN and NG-T use 64 probe features, scaled to match our model’s inference
parameters.


and (2) assessing the generalization capabilities of CNN classifiers by analyzing their weights. We compare
the proposed method with several state-of-the-art methods, including NFN (Zhou et al., 2024a), NFT (Zhou
et al., 2024b) and NG-GNN/NG-T (Kofinas et al., 2024). More implementation details are provided in
Appendix G.

8.1   Classifying INRs with INR2JLS

Experiment Setup. There are mainly two steps in order to use our proposed framework for INR classifica-
tion. First, we utilize the INR2JLS framework introduced in Section 6, which uses DNG-Encoder proposed in
Section 5 along with a proposed augmentation strategy to generate a permutation-invariant implicit feature
map, Faug , that captures diverse semantic information from images via reconstruction. Our augmentation
involves five transformations, including clockwise rotations of 90, 180 and 270 degrees, as well as horizontal
and vertical flips. This increases the channels of Faug to six times of a single latent feature F, represented
as Faug ∈ Rhs ×ws ×6d .
Second, we keep the DNG-Encoder and the Latent Generator fixed and add additional classification CNN
that takes Faug as inputs. During training, given a set of INR weights and their corresponding label, the
DNG-Encoder processes the INR weights to produce Faug . Then Faug is used as input to the classification
CNN, and we optimize the CNN using cross-entropy loss to learn a mapping from latent space to label
space. It is worth emphasizing that during the training for classifying INRs, we do not directly optimize our
encoder to encourage it extracting label-relevant features from input INRs. Instead, we employ a pre-trained
encoder, which is learned in a self-supervised manner. In this case, the performance of classification can
indicate the quality of the learned latent space.
Comparison Results. Table 1 presents a comparison between our method and several state-of-the-art
approaches on the test sets of the four aforementioned datasets (MNIST, FashionMNIST, CIFAR-10, and
CIFAR-100). Our method consistently exhibits superior performance compared to all other approaches.


                                                           10
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                      Model                 CIFAR-10-GS     SVHN-GS       CNN Wild Park
                      NFN (HNP)              0.934±0.001    0.931±0.005          -
                      NFN (NP)               0.922±0.001    0.856±0.001          -
                      NFT                    0.926±0.001    0.858±0.000          -
                      NG-GNN                 0.930±0.001    0.863±0.002     0.8040±0.0090
                      NG-T                   0.935±0.000    0.872±0.001     0.8170±0.0070
                      DNG-Encoder (Ours)     0.936±0.000    0.867±0.002    0.8743±0.0021

Table 2: Kendall’s rank correlation coefficient (τ ) for different models in predicting CNN generalization
performance, where higher τ values indicate better prediction accuracy.



Notably, as the difficulty of the dataset increases, our method not only outperforms the best existing method
but does so by an increasingly larger margin. Particularly noteworthy is the performance on the challenging
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, where our method surpasses other models by at least 9% and 10%,
respectively. This indicates that our method effectively extracts representative features from deep weight
spaces.


8.2   Predicting CNN Classifier Generalization

The above experiments evaluate the capability of our model to handle dynamic neural graphs built from
the weight space of INRs. Here, we aim to evaluate the performance of our method on processing dynamic
neural graphs built with CNN architecture. It is worth emphasizing that the objective of this experiment is
to predict the test accuracy of a trained CNN classifier using its parameters. Following Zhou et al. (2024a),
we conduct this experiment on the Small CNN Zoo (Unterthiner et al., 2020) dataset. This dataset contains
thousands of CNNs trained on public image classification datasets. We follow Zhou et al. (2024a) to evaluate
the CNNs trained on CIFAR-10-GS and SVHN-GS datasets. Furthermore, to ensure a rigorous evaluation of
its robustness, we assessed our dynamic graph method on the challenging CNN Wild Park dataset (Kofinas
et al., 2024). This benchmark is characterized by highly heterogeneous CNN architectures, featuring diverse
configurations in terms of layers, channels, and skip connections.
We employ the DNG-Encoder to process the dynamic neural graph derived from the input CNNs. Subse-
quently, we add an MLP to map the recurrent memory s(tL ) of the last graph layer at the final timestamp to
the predicted test accuracy of the CNN. We use binary cross-entropy loss in the training. For models tested
on the CNN Wild Park dataset, we ensure a strictly fair comparison by aligning our model’s parameter count
(∼0.4M) with the NG baselines.
Table 2 shows the test performance of different models on the CIFAR-10-GS, SVHN-GS, and CNN Wild
Park datasets using the rank correlation τ (Kendall, 1938) as the metric. It can be observed that our model
outperforms all other methods on the CIFAR-10-GS dataset. Regarding the performance on the SVHN-GS
dataset, we acknowledge that NFN(HNP) exhibits strong performance in that specific setting. However,
a critical limitation of NFN(HNP) (and similar weight-sharing methods such as NFN(NP) and NFT) is
that they are structurally restricted to homogeneous network architectures (i.e., identical layer counts and
widths). They fundamentally cannot process the highly heterogeneous architectures found in CNN Wild Park
or real-world model zoos. In contrast, our dynamic graph framework is architecture-agnostic and effortlessly
generalizes across diverse network topologies, providing a much broader and more practical utility. This is
strongly evidenced by our DNG-Encoder significantly outperforming the static graph baselines (NG-GNN
and NG-T) on the heterogeneous CNN Wild Park dataset.


9     Further Empirical Analysis

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of each module/components in the proposed INR2JLS, we present
a comprehensive analysis below.


                                                      11
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




       Study Type                 Method                     MNIST          FashionMNIST           CIFAR-10        CIFAR-100
       Recon. Study           INR2JLS (Ours)                 98.6±0.01        90.6±0.07                73.2±0.28    42.4±0.32
                                 INR-INR                     98.6±0.08        88.3±0.04                56.3±0.25    30.6±0.16
       Modules’ Study        DNG-Encoder                     96.6±0.09        78.4±0.61                54.0±0.07    25.7±0.12
                         INR2JLS w/o Latent Generator        98.4±0.08        88.9±0.28                54.5±0.51    28.1±0.43
                            INR2JLS (Ours)                   98.6±0.01        90.6±0.07                73.2±0.28    42.4±0.32

Table 3: Top: Ablation study on image reconstruction in INR2JLS. Bottom: Ablation study on the impor-
tance of different modules (DNG-Encoder, Latent Generator) in INR2JLS. Results are shown in classification
accuracy (%).

                                                  MNIST      FashionMNIST    CIFAR-10     CIFAR-100
                              No Augmentation    98.5±0.00      89.5±0.07    66.4±0.19     32.9±0.31
                              Adding Noise       98.4±0.01      89.5±0.06    67.3±0.38     33.0±0.24
                              Rotation & Flip    98.6±0.01      90.6±0.07    73.2±0.28     42.4±0.32


      Table 4: Test accuracy (%) of INR classification using INR2JLS, with/without data augmentation.


9.1    Analysis of the Data Augmentation.

We conduct an analysis on the effectiveness of the augmentation strategy introduced in Section 6. By
comparing the third and fifth row in Table 4, it can be found that the rotation and flip augmentation can
help improve the classification accuracy significantly. For example, on complex datasets such as CIFAR-10
/ CIFAR-100, using rotation and flip augmentations can improve over baseline by around 7% and 9%.

9.2    The Importance of Image Reconstruction in the INR2JLS.

First, we conduct an experiment to compare the performance of two frameworks, our proposed image re-
construction framework (INR2JLS), and the INR-weight reconstruction framework (INR-INR), on the INR
classification task. For the INR-INR framework, we employ the DNG-Encoder but use two MLPs to map
the node memory, generated by the encoder, to the weights and biases of an INR. Subsequently, we adopt
a methodology same as the NFT (Zhou et al., 2024b) to compute the loss between the image obtained by
the reconstructed INR and the original image. Finally, an MLP is employed to classify the INR based on
the node memory output from the pretrained encoder. Table 3 (Top) shows the classification performance
of the two frameworks on INR datasets. Our INR2JLS outperforms INR-INR, highlighting the significance
of learning a joint space between INR and the original images.

9.3    Ablation Study of Key Components in INR2JLS.

We here conduct ablation experiments to assess the individual contributions of the two modules (Decoder and
Latent Generator) within the INR2JLS framework towards enhancing performance in the INR classification
task. In the first ablation experiment, we remove the decoder from INR2JLS and directly add an MLP
classifier on the output of the encoder (node memory). In the second ablation experiment, we remove the
Latent Generator from the INR2JLS framework, and employ an MLP decoder to directly map the node
memory obtained from the DNG-Encoder to images for the reconstruction task. We then utilize another
MLP to classify the node memory generated by the pretrained DNG-Encoder. Table 3 (Bottom) shows
the experimental results. Our INR2JLS significantly outperforms its two variants with component removal,
further demonstrating the necessity of the proposed Decoder and Latent Generator.

9.4    Efficiency analysis.

Table 5 compares running time, memory usage, and computational complexity for processing a single INR.
INR2JLS is significantly faster than other methods, with slightly higher memory usage than NG-GNN but
much lower than NFN and NFT, and has the lowest computational complexity overall. We believe these
advantages make INR2JLS a efficient choice for processing neural network weights.


                                                                 12
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                                          Run Time (s) Memory (MB) Comp. Cost (GFLOPs)
                          NFN            0.0082±0.00009    273.08        2.58
                          NFT            0.0527±0.00170    241.15        10.60
                          NG-GNN         0.0124±0.00070    27.40         2.13
                          NG-T           0.0092±0.00041     29.77        14.82
                          INR2JLS (Ours) 0.0047±0.00018     29.17        1.31


Table 5: Inference efficiency comparison for INR classification on the MNIST INR dataset, measured by the
inference time of a single INR for each method.


9.5   Analysis of Positional Encoding in INR2JLS

Our method uses an RNN-based GNN to process network weights sequentially, naturally capturing layer
order without requiring explicit positional encoding. To verify this design choice, we add learnable positional
embeddings to node features at different layers and evaluate their effect (Table 6). The results show no
notable performance improvement across the four INR classification datasets, indicating that positional
encoding is unnecessary for our framework.

      Method Variant                          MNIST     FashionMNIST             CIFAR-10    CIFAR-100
                                    Effect of Positional Encoding
      INR2JLS with positional encoding       98.6±0.02    89.9±0.09              73.5±0.04   42.7±0.16
      INR2JLS (Ours)                         98.6±0.01    90.6±0.07              73.2±0.28   42.4±0.32
                                Effect of Non-linearity Embeddings
      INR2JLS add non-linearity embeddings 98.4±0.16      90.4±0.01              73.2±0.12   42.6±0.04
      INR2JLS (Ours)                         98.6±0.01    90.6±0.07              73.2±0.28   42.4±0.32

Table 6: Ablation study on INR2JLS. We analyze (1) the effect of positional encoding and (2) the effect of
non-linearity embeddings. Results are reported as classification test accuracy (%) across four datasets.


9.6   Analysis of Non-linearity Embeddings in INR2JLS

In Kofinas et al. (2024), non-linearities are explicitly encoded as node features because their update function
shares parameters across all layers, making such embeddings necessary to distinguish activation types. In
contrast, as shown in Equation 4, our framework applies separate GNN layers to each timestamp. Given the
expressivity of GNNs on neural networks (Appendix B of Kofinas et al. (2024)), each layer can directly learn
its own activation behavior, eliminating the need for explicit non-linearity embeddings. To validate this, we
augment our model with learnable non-linearity embeddings following Kofinas et al. (2024). As reported in
Table 6, their inclusion yields no meaningful performance change across all four INR classification datasets,
confirming that explicit non-linearity encoding is unnecessary in our framework.

10    Conclusion and Limitation

In this paper, we have introduced a novel method to model neural network weights as dynamic graphs.
To process these structures, we propose the Dynamic Neural Graph Encoder (DNG-Encoder) to capture
the temporal dynamics intrinsic to neural network inference, thereby maintaining the sequential flow of
data through layers. We further enhance the model’s utility via INR2JLS, which maps INR weights into a
joint latent space to provide a more informative and robust representation for downstream tasks. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach across various benchmarks.
While our framework significantly advances the analysis of deep weight spaces, it is important to explicitly
define the applicability boundaries of different weight-space representations. Our dynamic graphs excel in
representation learning and discriminative tasks involving deep networks (e.g., INR classification, generaliza-
tion prediction), where capturing the layer-by-layer forward pass resolves the inverse problem and preserves
deep functional semantics. However, we acknowledge that simpler static or tokenized representations may


                                                          13
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




suffice in certain scenarios. For weight editing and generative tasks (e.g., INR style editing), static graphs
with explicit edge-update mechanisms or tokenized models can be particularly suitable. While our current
DNG architecture is primarily designed for node state evolution, extending it with dedicated mechanisms
for generative edge reconstruction is an interesting direction for future work.
Beyond architectural applicability, we also acknowledge the potential dual-use implications of this emerging
field. Capabilities that allow for inferring detailed properties directly from weights could be leveraged for
unauthorized model attribution or the reverse-engineering of proprietary checkpoints. Consequently, we
encourage the community to concurrently explore defensive mechanisms, such as weight obfuscation and
robust watermarking, to safeguard neural architectures. Finally, despite our advancements, our method’s
performance on INR classification still lags behind that of CNNs on analogous image-space tasks. Bridging
this performance gap and developing more powerful temporal GNN variants remain promising directions for
future improvement.

References
Bruno Andreis, Bedionita Soro, Philip Torr, and Sung Ju Hwang. Set-based neural network encoding without
  weight tying. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=i3me9bCSCy.
Jørgen Bang-Jensen and Gregory Z Gutin. Digraphs: theory, algorithms and applications. Springer Science
  & Business Media, 2008.
Matthias Bauer, Emilien Dupont, Andy Brock, Dan Rosenbaum, Jonathan Richard Schwarz, and Hyun-
 jik Kim. Spatial functa: Scaling functa to imagenet classification and generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2302.03130, 2023.
Jie Chen, Aldo Pareja, Giacomo Domeniconi, Tengfei Ma, Toyotaro Suzumura, Timothy Kaler, Tao B
  Schardl, and Charles E Leiserson. Evolving graph convolutional networks for dynamic graphs, December 27
  2022. US Patent 11,537,852.
Luca De Luigi, Adriano Cardace, Riccardo Spezialetti, Pierluigi Zama Ramirez, Samuele Salti, and Luigi
  Di Stefano. Deep learning on implicit neural representations of shapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05438,
  2023.
Emilien Dupont, Hyunjik Kim, SM Eslami, Danilo Rezende, and Dan Rosenbaum. From data to functa:
 Your data point is a function and you can treat it like one. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12204, 2022.
Kyle Genova, Forrester Cole, Avneesh Sud, Aaron Sarna, and Thomas Funkhouser. Deep structured implicit
 functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06126, 2:2, 2019.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural message
  passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1263–1272. PMLR,
  2017.
Amos Gropp, Lior Yariv, Niv Haim, Matan Atzmon, and Yaron Lipman. Implicit geometric regularization
 for learning shapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10099, 2020.
Xiaolong Han, Ferrante Neri, Zijian Jiang, Fang Wu, Yanfang Ye, Lu Yin, and Zehong Wang. W2t: Lora
  weights already know what they can do. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15990, 2026a.
Xiaolong Han, Zehong Wang, Bo Zhao, Binchi Zhang, Jundong Li, Damian Borth, Rose Yu, Haggai Maron,
  Yanfang Ye, Lu Yin, et al. A survey of weight space learning: Understanding, representation, and gener-
  ation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.10090, 2026b.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Robert Hecht-Nielsen. Neurocomputing. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1989.


                                                     14
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Seyed Mehran Kazemi, Rishab Goel, Kshitij Jain, Ivan Kobyzev, Akshay Sethi, Peter Forsyth, and Pascal
  Poupart. Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  21(70):1–73, 2020.

Maurice G Kendall. A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1/2):81–93, 1938.

Miltiadis Kofinas, Boris Knyazev, Yan Zhang, Yunlu Chen, Gertjan J Burghouts, Efstratios Gavves, Cees GM
 Snoek, and David W Zhang. Graph neural networks for learning equivariant representations of neural
 networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12143, 2024.

Derek Lim, Haggai Maron, Marc T. Law, Jonathan Lorraine, and James Lucas. Graph metanetworks for
  processing diverse neural architectures. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ijK5hyxs0n.

Luke Metz, James Harrison, C Daniel Freeman, Amil Merchant, Lucas Beyer, James Bradbury, Naman
  Agrawal, Ben Poole, Igor Mordatch, Adam Roberts, et al. Velo: Training versatile learned optimizers by
  scaling up. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09760, 2022.

Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Idan Achituve, Ethan Fetaya, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron. Equivariant
  architectures for learning in deep weight spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  25790–25816. PMLR, 2023.

Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual rea-
  soning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 32, 2018.

Emanuele Rossi, Ben Chamberlain, Fabrizio Frasca, Davide Eynard, Federico Monti, and Michael Bron-
 stein. Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs. arxiv 2020. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.10637.

Konstantin Schürholt, Boris Knyazev, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Damian Borth. Hyper-representations as
  generative models: Sampling unseen neural network weights. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:27906–27920, 2022.

Youngjoo Seo, Michaël Defferrard, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Xavier Bresson. Structured sequence model-
  ing with graph convolutional recurrent networks. In Neural Information Processing: 25th International
  Conference, ICONIP 2018, Siem Reap, Cambodia, December 13-16, 2018, Proceedings, Part I 25, pp.
  362–373. Springer, 2018.

Aviv Shamsian, Aviv Navon, David W Zhang, Yan Zhang, Ethan Fetaya, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron.
  Improved generalization of weight space networks via augmentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04081,
  2024.

Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Implicit neural
  representations with periodic activation functions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  7462–7473, 2020.

Veronika Thost and Jie Chen. Directed acyclic graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07965,
  2021.

Rakshit Trivedi, Hanjun Dai, Yichen Wang, and Le Song. Know-evolve: Deep temporal reasoning for dynamic
  knowledge graphs. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 3462–3471. PMLR, 2017.

Rakshit Trivedi, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Prasenjeet Biswal, and Hongyuan Zha. Dyrep: Learning representa-
  tions over dynamic graphs. In International conference on learning representations, 2019.

Thomas Unterthiner, Daniel Keysers, Sylvain Gelly, Olivier Bousquet, and Ilya Tolstikhin. Predicting neural
  network accuracy from weights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11448, 2020.


                                                     15
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




Chris Zhang, Mengye Ren, and Raquel Urtasun. Graph hypernetworks for neural architecture search. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1810.05749, 2018.
Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Kaylee Burns, Adriano Cardace, Yiding Jiang, Samuel Sokota, J Zico Kolter, and
  Chelsea Finn. Permutation equivariant neural functionals. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024a.
Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Yiding Jiang, Kaylee Burns, Winnie Xu, Samuel Sokota, J Zico Kolter, and Chelsea
  Finn. Neural functional transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.




                                                  16
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




A    How Does the DNG-Encoder Exhibit the Expressiveness of Neural Networks?

Using the DNG-Encoder to update nodes in dynamic neural graph ideally simulates the sequential updating
pattern of neural networks. This approach effectively avoids the inverse problem typically encountered in
static neural graphs as discussed in Section 3.3, so as to better exhibit the expressiveness of neural networks.
Below, we discuss how the DNG-Encoder model better represents the expressiveness of MLPs compared to
the static neural graph-based model.
An MLP M can be transformed into a dynamic neural graph GT or a static neural graph Gs . In GT , we update
node representations asynchronously at each layer by modifying the graph structure at each timestamp to
align with the forward pass process of M. The graph structure under each timestamp of GT is a layer-by-layer
snapshot taken from Gs . It contains the neurons involved in the computation of the neural network in each
forward pass step and simulates the topology of these neurons. For example, the graph state Gtl (0 < l ≤ L)
of GT only contains nodes at the l-th layer and the (l − 1)-th layer of Gs and edges at the l-th layer of Gs . The
initial representations of all nodes and edges present in GT over the time span T = [t0 : tL ] can be defined as
{v(t0 ), v(t1 ), ..., v(tL )} and {e(t1 ), ..., e(tL )}. Similar to Gs , these nodes and edges represent the biases and
weights of each layer in M. According to DNG-Encoder defined in Section 5, the memory of target nodes
si (tl ) at timestamp tl can be obtained by using the following equation:
                                                   X     l
                                 si (tl ) = ϕu (       ϕtm eij tl , sj tl − , vi (tl )),                          (10)
                                                                          

                                               j∈Ni

         l
where ϕtm is the message function at tl , corresponding to the Message Function in the DNG-Encoder. ϕu is
the node update function shared for all timestamps, corresponding to the GRU module in DNG-Encoder.
For example, at the first timestamp t1 , eij (t1 ) is an initial representation of an edge newly added at t1 ,
corresponding to Wij    1
                           in Equation 1, while sj (t1 −) corresponds to the input xj in Equation 1. From Equation
                      t1
4, we know that ϕm can approximate the multiplication operation between two given inputs. Thus, given
eij (t1 ) and sj (t1 −), its output can represent Wij   1
                                                          xj in Equation 1. vi (t1 ) is the initial representation of a
newly added node at t1 , corresponding to b1i in Equation 1. From Equation 6, given the aggregation of the
               t1
outputs of ϕm     and vi (t1 ), ϕu can easily approximate the computation of adding b1i to j Wij         1
                                                                                                           xj and then
                                                                                                  P

applying an activation function. In this way, we say that si (t ) can directly represent ai .
                                                                    1                              1




Figure 6: An illustration of how dynamic neural graphs and the DNG-Encoder simulate the forward pass of
a neural network while addressing the limitations present in static neural graphs.

According to the discussion in Section 3.2 and 3.3, it is evident that the static neural graph-based model
can also approximate the first forward pass step of M easily using one MPNN layer. However, it faces
challenges in approximating subsequent forward pass steps due to the emergence of the “inverse problem”.
The following demonstrates how the DNG-Encoder avoids the inverse problem during computation, thereby


                                                             17
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




enabling it to easily approximate the forward pass process for all steps of M. We here define the process of
M to obtain the i-th activation ail at the l-th layer as follows:


                                                    X
                                            ail = σ(      aj + bli ).
                                                       l l−1
                                                      Wij                                                         (11)
                                                      j




At any timestamp tl , vi (tl ) in Equation 10 is the initial representation of the newly added node, corresponding
to bli in Equation 11. Smilarily, eij (tl ) in Equation 10 is the initial representation of the newly added edge,
corresponding to Wij l
                       in Equation 11. Besides, sj (tl −) in Equation 10 corresponds to ajl−1 .
                                                                                                    l        L
Following the expressivity in Kofinas et al. (2024), this suggests that the message functions ϕtm , . . . , ϕtm , which
have the same structure at all timestamps, along with the shared update function ϕu , can accurately model
all forward pass steps of M. Since the inputs to the message/update functions are simple and do not contain
extra complex terms, the approximation is straightforward, eliminating the risk of inverse problems and
allowing si (tl ) to directly represent ail . Therefore, the proposed DNG-Encoder can maximally approximate
the forward pass of M. Figure 6 intuitively illustrates how dynamic neural graphs and the DNG-Encoder
eliminate the risk of inverse problems and effectively simulate the forward pass of M.



B    Disentangling the Contribution of the Dynamic Graph Architecture

We conduct an additional experiment on the INR classification task to explicitly evaluate and disentangle the
contribution of the dynamic graph itself from the broader INR2JLS framework. This experiment provides a
direct, intuitive task-level comparison between graph architectures.
To ensure strict fairness and to emphasize the intrinsic expressiveness of the graph frameworks, we compare
our DNG-Encoder directly against the static graph baselines, NG-GNN and NG-T (Kofinas et al., 2024). In
all cases, we use only the graph encoders followed by a standard MLP classification head, entirely removing
the joint latent-space supervision and data augmentations of the full INR2JLS pipeline. Crucially, we also
remove the probe features from the NG-GNN and NG-T models. Probe features are intermediate outputs
generated by feeding specific inputs during the forward pass; because they explicitly leak dynamic forward-
pass information into the static graph, they act as a shortcut that bypasses the static structure’s inherent
limitations. Excluding them is therefore essential to observe the true capabilities of the static graph versus
dynamic graph structures themselves.
Table 7 presents the classification performance of the three models on the MNIST, FashionMNIST, and
CIFAR-10 INR datasets. The results reveal that simply upgrading the architecture from a static graph (NG-
T) to our dynamic graph (DNG-Encoder) yields a massive performance leap (e.g., +9.31% on CIFAR-10).
This empirical evidence confirms that dynamic graphs provide a fundamentally superior and more expressive
architectural backbone for capturing the semantics of neural networks compared to static graphs.



Table 7: Test accuracy (%) for the INR classification task comparing pure graph encoders without aug-
mentations or joint latent-space supervision. Probe features are excluded from the static NG baselines to
isolate the structural expressiveness of the graphs. Our dynamic DNG-Encoder consistently and significantly
outperforms the static graph-based classifiers across all three datasets.
               Method                       #Params        MNIST          FashionMNIST        CIFAR-10
               NG-GNN (Static)               ∼0.3M        79.60±1.30        71.10±0.42        43.94±0.06
               NG-T (Static)                 ∼0.4M        83.43±0.12        72.13±0.51        44.69±0.03
               DNG-Encoder (Ours)            ∼0.4M        96.60±0.09        78.40±0.61        54.00±0.07



                                                          18
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




C     Dynamic Neural Graph Symmetry

C.1     Background and Definitions

C.1.1    Neuron Permutation Symmetry in Neural Networks

                                                                            l=1 and biases {b }l=1 . The
Consider an L-layer Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) M with weight matrices {Wl }L                l L

network computes activations as:


                                    hl = σ Wl hl−1 + bl ,            for l = 1, 2, . . . , L,                        (12)
                                                       


where h0 is the input and σ is an activation function.
Neuron Permutation Symmetry: Permuting the neurons within a hidden layer l and appropriately
adjusting the corresponding rows and columns of the weight matrices and biases leaves the function repre-
sented by the network unchanged. Formally, for any permutation π l of the neurons in layer l, there exists a
transformed network M̃ such that:

                                              l
                                                  l−1 ⊤                            l
                                      W̃l = Pπ Wl Pπ      ,                b̃l = Pπ bl ,                             (13)

           l
where Pπ is the permutation matrix corresponding to π l .

C.2     Objective

Our goal is to prove that the dynamic neural graph GT is equivariant to neuron permutations in the MLP
M. That is, permuting the neurons in any layer l corresponds to permuting the nodes vl in GT , and the
graph update operations Otl are consistent under such permutations.

C.3     Proof of Equivariance

C.3.1    Defining Permutations in Neural Networks and Graphs
                                                                                         l
Let π l be a permutation of the neurons in layer l of the MLP, and let Pπ be the corresponding permutation
matrix. The permutation acts on the weights and biases as in Equation 13.
In the dynamic neural graph, we adopt the convention that the permutation π l relocates node i to position
                                                                 l           l
π l (i), i.e., ṽπl l (i) = vil , which is equivalent to ṽl = Pπ vl with (Pπ )ab = 1[a = π l (b)]. Under this convention,
π l acts on the nodes vl and edges el as follows:

                                                               l
      • Nodes: The permuted nodes satisfy ṽl = Pπ vl .

      • Edges: Each edge from node j in vl−1 to node i in vl becomes an edge from node π l−1 (j) to node
        π l (i) after permutation.


C.3.2    Node Permutations Correspond to Neuron Permutations

Since each node vil corresponds to neuron i in layer l of the MLP, permuting the neurons directly corresponds
to permuting the nodes:


                                                      ṽπl l (i) = vil .                                             (14)


                                                             19
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




C.3.3   Edge Adjustments Under Permutation

Edges el represent the connections (weights) between nodes in vl−1 and vl . The adjacency matrix Al
corresponding to edges el is related to the weight matrix Wl .
Under permutations π l−1 and π l , the adjacency matrix transforms as:

                                                   l
                                                       l−1 ⊤
                                           Ãl = Pπ Al Pπ      .                                           (15)

This ensures that the structure of the graph remains consistent with the permuted network.

C.3.4   Equivariance of Graph Update Operations

The graph update operations Otl are defined independently of node identities and depend only on the layer
structure. Therefore, they are consistent under permutations:


                                                   Õtl = Otl .                                            (16)

Applying the joint permutation (π l−1 , π l ) to Gtl after the graph update operations yields:


                                             G̃tl = (π l−1 , π l ) · Gtl ,                                 (17)
where (π l−1 , π l ) permutes nodes in vl−1 and vl via π l−1 and π l respectively, and updates the edges accord-
ingly.

C.3.5   Inductive Proof Over Layers

We use mathematical induction over the layers l to show that the graph remains equivariant under permu-
tations.

Base Case (l = 1)     At t1 :

     • The graph Gt1 consists of input nodes v0 and nodes v1 .

     • Permuting v1 corresponds to permuting neurons in layer 1.

     • The update operations Ot1 are equivariant under π 1 .

Inductive Step      Assume Gtl−1 is equivariant under permutations up to layer l − 1. At tl :

     • Applying Otl to Gtl−1 adds nodes vl and edges el .

     • Under permutation π l , nodes and edges are permuted as per Equations 14 and 15.

     • Thus, Gtl remains equivariant under the combined permutations π l−1 and π l .

By induction, GT is equivariant under neuron permutations at each layer.

D    Equivariance of the DNG-Encoder on Dynamic Graphs

In this section, we prove that our proposed DNG-Encoder, when applied to dynamic graphs, is equivariant
under node permutations. This property ensures that if the nodes of the input graph are permuted, the
output will be permuted in the same way, maintaining consistency regardless of the node ordering.


                                                         20
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




D.1   Definition of Equivariance

A function F operating on graphs is said to be equivariant to node permutations if, for any permutation
π and input graph G, the following holds:

                                               F (π · G) = π · F (G),                                   (18)

where π ·G denotes the graph obtained by permuting the nodes of G according to π, and similarly for π ·F (G).

D.2   Equivariance of the Message Passing Function

Our message passing function is defined differently for single-edge and multi-edge cases.

Single-Edge Case For the case where there is only one edge between a pair of nodes (i.e., for the dynamic
neural graph converted from an MLP), the message function is defined in Equation 4 as:
                               X l
                                                              tl              tl
                                                           X
                    mi (tl ) =  ϕtm sj (tl− ), eij (tl ) =       eij (tl ) ⊙ Wm2 sj (tl− ),           (19)
                                                        
                                                             Wm1
                              j∈Ni                                j∈Ni


Proof of Equivariance:
Let π be a permutation of the node indices. Recall that, following Equation 19, eij (tl ) denotes the edge
from source node j to target node i. Under permutation π:

      • Node i is relocated to position π(i).

      • The neighbor set Ni becomes Nπ(i) = {π(j) | j ∈ Ni }.

      • The edge from j to i becomes the edge from π(j) to π(i).

      • Node states and edge features are permuted accordingly:

                                     s′π(j) (tl− ) = sj (tl− ),    e′π(i)π(j) (tl ) = eij (tl ).        (20)

The message for node π(i) after permutation is:

                                                 tl ′               tl ′ l−
                                          X
                              ′
                            mπ(i) (tl ) =       Wm1 eπ(i)k (tl ) ⊙ Wm2 sk (t )
                                            k∈Nπ(i)
                                            X         l                        l
                                        =           t
                                                   Wm1 e′π(i)π(j) (tl ) ⊙ Wm2
                                                                           t
                                                                              s′π(j) (tl− )
                                            j∈Ni                                                        (21)
                                                    tl              tl
                                            X
                                        =          Wm1 eij (tl ) ⊙ Wm2 sj (tl− )
                                            j∈Ni

                                        = mi (tl ).

Therefore, we have:
                                                 ′
                                                mπ(i) (tl ) = mi (tl ),                                 (22)
which shows that the message passing function is equivariant under node permutations in the single-edge
case.

Multi-Edge Case For the case where there are multiple edges between a pair of nodes (i.e., for the
dynamic neural graph converted from a CNN), the message function is:
                                   X l                                          
                        mi (tl ) =   ϕth Concat head1ij (tl ), . . . , headN
                                                                           ij (t )
                                                                                l
                                                                                     ,        (23)
                                     j∈Ni


                                                           21
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




where each head is defined as:
                                                                  l                        l
                                        headnij (tl ) = Wm1
                                                         t
                                                            eij,n (tl ) ⊙ Wnt sj (tl− ).                        (24)


Proof of Equivariance:
Under permutation π, similar reasoning applies:

      • Edge features are permuted: e′π(i)π(j),n (tl ) = eij,n (tl ).

      • Node states are permuted: s′π(j) (tl− ) = sj (tl− ).


The message for node π(i) is:
                                        X          l
                                                                                                   
                       ′
                      mπ(i) (tl ) =             ϕth Concat head1π(i)k (tl ), . . . , headN
                                                                                         π(i)k (t l
                                                                                                    )
                                      k∈Nπ(i)
                                      X         l
                                                                                                      
                                 =           ϕth Concat head1π(i)π(j) (tl ), . . . , headN
                                                                                         π(i)π(j) (t l
                                                                                                       )
                                      j∈Ni                                                                      (25)
                                      X         l
                                                                                                         
                                 =           ϕth        Concat        head1ij (tl ), . . . , headN
                                                                                                 ij (t )
                                                                                                      l

                                      j∈Ni

                                 = mi (tl ).


Thus, the message passing function remains equivariant under node permutations in the multi-edge case as
well.

D.3    Equivariance of the Recurrent Memory Updating

The recurrent memory update function is defined as:
                                       l
                         si (tl ) = ϕtu (mi (tl ), vi (tl )) = LayerNorm GRU(mi (tl ), vi (tl )) ,              (26)
                                                                                                


where vi (tl ) is the feature of node i at time tl . Both GRU and LayerNorm are applied per node with
parameters shared across all nodes, so they preserve permutation equivariance.
Under permutation π, node features are permuted:

                                                            ′
                                                           vπ(i) (tl ) = vi (tl ).                              (27)


Messages are permuted:
                                                           ′
                                                          mπ(i) (tl ) = mi (tl ).                               (28)

Therefore, the updated memory state for node π(i) is:
                                                          l
                                      s′π(i) (tl ) = ϕtu (mπ(i)
                                                           ′
                                                                (tl ), vπ(i)
                                                                        ′
                                                                             (tl ))
                                                    = LayerNorm GRU(mi (tl ), vi (tl ))                         (29)
                                                                                                       

                                                    = si (t ).l



This shows that the memory update function is equivariant under node permutations.


                                                                         22
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




D.4    Equivariance of Graph Update Events

Our dynamic graph evolves through graph update events defined at each time tl , as specified in Equation 3.
These events include node addition (+V ), edge addition (+E), node deletion (−V ), and edge deletion (−E).
Under permutation π:

      • Added nodes vl become vl′ = {π(i) | vil ∈ vl }.

      • Added edges el become el′ = {(π(i), π(j)) | (vil−1 , vjl ) ∈ el }.

      • Deleted nodes and edges are permuted similarly.

Since the graph update operations are applied consistently to the permuted nodes and edges, the sequence
of graph updates remains equivariant under node permutations.

D.5    Conclusion

By demonstrating that each component of our DNG-Encoder is equivariant under node permutations, we
establish that the entire model maintains equivariance when applied to dynamic graphs. This property
ensures that the model’s outputs are consistent regardless of the node ordering, capturing the intrinsic
structure of the graph without being influenced by arbitrary node labels.

E     Analysis on Computational Cost

Since our method does not require a decoder for inference, we focus this analysis on providing theoretical
results for the computational costs during the inference within the encoder.
To determine the time complexity of applying an L-layer Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN) on a
graph, we consider the following characteristics:

      • Number of nodes per MLP layer: n. For simplicity, we assume each MLP layer has n neurons.

      • Dimension of node/edge features: d. For simplicity, we assume the dimensions of edge and
        node features are the same.

      • Number of MLP layers: L.

E.1   Time Complexity of Our Method

      1. Message Computation (Equation 4):
          • Per edge computation: O(d2 ) (including edge feature transformation).
          • Total edges computation: O(n2 · L · d2 ). There are n2 edges in an MLP layer, and L total layers.

      2. Aggregation (Equation 4):
          • Per node aggregation: O(n · d). Each node aggregates messages from its n neighbors in the
            graph from the previous time step.
          • Total nodes: O(n2 · L · d).

      3. Recurrent Memory Updates (Equation 6): O(n · L · d2 ).

Total Computational Complexity: O(n2 · L · d2 + n2 · L · d + n · L · d2 )
Analysis: For large input networks, the term O(n2 · L · d2 ) dominates the overall computational cost.


                                                         23
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




E.2     Space Complexity of Our Method
       1. Node and Edge Features: O(n2 · d + n · d). We store the node and edge features of the graph
          from the previous time step, corresponding to the previous MLP layer.
       2. Memory (Equation 6): O(n · d).

Total Space Complexity: O(n2 · d + n · d)

F     Neural Networks as Dynamic Neural Graphs
F.1    Additional Components in CNNs as Dynamic Neural Graphs

In Section 4.2, we outlined how to convert the fundamental modules of CNNs - the convolutional layers and
the linear layers - into modules within the dynamic neural graph. In modern CNNs, besides convolutional
and linear layers, there are often additional components like the flattening layer and residual connections
He et al. (2016). To ensure our dynamic neural graph framework is applicable to a wide range of CNN
architectures, we define how to convert flattening layers and residual connections to the modules in dynamic
neural graphs.
Flattening layer. The flattening layer in CNNs is used to convert multi-dimensional feature maps into
a single feature vector that can be accepted by fully connected layers for subsequent operations. The
dimensions of the feature map output by a convolutional layer at the l-th layer of a CNN are hlf t × wfl t × cl ,
where hlf t and wfl t represent the spatial dimensions of the feature map, cl denotes the number of channels
of the feature map. Assuming we flatten the feature map to a single feature vector of dimension dl , where
dl = hlf t × wfl t × cl . A linear layer is then utilized at the (l + 1)-th layer of the CNN to perform a linear
transformation on this flattened feature vector, yielding a vector of dimension dl+1 .
In the dynamic neural graph, cl corresponds to the number of nodes in vl , and dl+1 corresponds to the
number of nodes in vl+1 . We can conceptualize the function of the flattening layer as generating hlf t × wfl t
virtual vertices within each node in vl , and they are subsequently connected to nodes vl+1 . Virtual vertices
do not contain any feature information, they are only used to indicate the connection relationship between
their carriers vl and nodes vl+1 . Each connection between a virtual vertex and a node in vl+1 corresponds
to a single weight scalar in the weight matrix W l+1 of the linear layer at the (l + 1)-th layer. In essence,
this implies that each node in vl is linked to a node in vl+1 via hlf t × wfl t edges by utilizing virtual vertices
embedded within itself. In addition, to maintain consistency in the number of edges between each pair of
nodes throughout the entire CNN, we employ the same method as proposed in Section 4.2 to pad the edges
between vl and vl+1 . To provide a more intuitive understanding of the process of converting the flattening
layer to the dynamic neural graph, we present an example in Figure 7.
Residual Connections. Residual connections are used in neural networks to address the gradient vanishing
problem. Specifically, a residual connection in a neural network allows the input to bypass one or more layers
and be added directly to the output. If a residual connection is established between the output of the l-th
layer and the output of the (l + r)-th layer in a CNN, then within the corresponding dynamic neural graph,
we define events occurring at timestamp tl+r as the addition of nodes vl at the l-th layer, in addition to
the addition and deletion of nodes and edges as defined in Section 4.2. Additionally, we add new edges
to ensure that each node vil at the l-th layer is connected to node vil+r at the (l + r)-th layer via a single
edge. Considering the potential differences brought by residual connections with different time spans or layer
spans to the update of target nodes, we define the edge feature of each of these edges between vl and vl+r
as el+r
    res,i = θres r, where θres ∈ R
                                  de
                                     is a learnable vector.

F.2    Transformers as Dynamic Neural Graphs

In the Transformer, the core modules are multi-head self-attention layers. Assuming there are h heads in
a multi-head self-attention layer. For each head headi , the input X with a dimension of dmodel 2 is firstly
    2 In general, X ∈ RL×dmodel . We omit the sequence length L here for clarity.




                                                               24
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                           virtual vertex




Figure 7: An example for converting the flattening layer to the dynamic neural graph, where edges correspond
to the weight scalar of the same color.


transformed into Qi ∈ Rdk , Ki ∈ Rdk and Vi ∈ Rdv through three linear projections.

                                               Qi = XWiQ ,                                             (30)

                                               Ki = XWiK ,                                             (31)
                                               Vi = XWiV ,                                             (32)
where WiQ ∈ Rdmodel ×dk , WiK ∈ Rdmodel ×dk and WiV ∈ Rdmodel ×dv . The scaled dot-product attention is then
computed using Qi , Ki and Vi , producing Zi ∈ Rdv .

                                                                         Qi K⊤
                                                                                
                           Zi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = Softmax        √ i        Vi                (33)
                                                                            dk

Finally, the Zi from all heads are concatenated, and the output Y with a dimension of dmodel is produced
through a linear transformation WO ∈ Rhdv ×dmodel .
To convert a multi-head self-attention layer into a dynamic neural graph while still simulating its forward
pass process, we divide the multi-head self-attention layer into three timestamps within the dynamic neural
graph.
In the first timestamp, we simulate the linear transformation from X to Qi , Ki and Vi . We begin by
adding dmodel nodes to the graph, with each node representing a dimension of the input X. Next, for each
head, we add dk + dk + dv nodes initialized as zero vectors, corresponding to the dimensions of Qi , Ki
and Vi . Additionally, we add each element of the weight matrices WiQ , WiK and WiV as a single edge to
the graph, connecting the corresponding nodes. Thus, for all heads, we add h × (dk + dk + dv ) nodes and
h × (dmodel × dk + dmodel × dk + dmodel × dv ) edges.
In the second timestamp, we simulate the computation process of scaled dot-product attention. First, we
delete the nodes corresponding to the input and the edges corresponding to WQ , WK and WV , keeping
only the nodes representing√ Q, K and V. It can be observed from Equation 33 that the dot product of Qi
and K⊤ i , the division by  dk and the element-wise multiplication with Vi are parameter-free operations.
Inspired by the method proposed by Kofinas et al. (2024), we design a simple graph structure to fit these


                                                    25
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




operations. Specifically, for each head, we augment the graph by adding dv nodes initialized with zero
vectors, corresponding to the dimensions of Zi . Additionally, we add edges connecting each newly added
node to the nodes corresponding to Qi , Ki and Vi . These edges are defined as learnable vectors, allowing
them to fit the parameter-free operations mentioned above during training. For all heads, we add a total of
h × dv nodes and h × (dk × dv + dk × dv + dv × dv ) edges in this timestamp.
In the last timestamp, we simulate the process of mapping the concatenation of {Z1 , Z2 , ..., Zh } to the output
Y. The process of performing the linear transformation using WO is the same as the linear transformation
using a linear layer in an MLP. Therefore, we can use the same method employed to convert linear layers
into dynamic neural graphs in MLPs to transform this linear transformation process.
Experiment. We conduct an experiment to predict the generalization of transformers by processing their
parameters, thereby validating the effectiveness of our proposed DNG framework in handling transformer
architectures. To construct the dataset, we follow the approach of Small CNN Zoo Unterthiner et al. (2020)
and create a transformer-specific dataset. Specifically, we train 1,000 Vision Transformer (ViT) models, each
initialized differently, using SimpleViT from the ViT_pytorch library to classify the CIFAR-10 dataset. Each
model is trained up to a certain epoch before being stopped, after which its parameters and test accuracy
are recorded. We split the trained models into 80% for training, 10% for validation, and 10% for testing.
Similar to the settings used for CNN generalization prediction in Section 8.2, we employ our proposed DNG-
Encoder followed by an MLP to predict the test accuracy of a ViT model given its parameters as input.
Using the approach proposed above, we construct the DNG for transformer architectures in our experiments.
The ViT model consists of two transformer blocks (10 timestamps), an embedding layer (1 timestamp), and
an output layer (1 timestamp), resulting in a dynamic graph with a total of 12 timestamps. For comparison,
we benchmark our DNG-Encoder against NG-GNN and NG-T (Kofinas et al., 2024). Following the official
guidelines in their work, we reproduced these baselines for Transformer neural graphs. To ensure a fair
comparison, we aligned the model capacities so that all methods have approximately 0.25M parameters. The
computational efficiency (Peak Memory and Latency) is profiled based on the inference cost of a single sample,
averaged over 10 independent runs. For predictive performance, we report the Kendall rank correlation
coefficient (τ ) calculated as the mean and standard deviation over 3 independent runs. Table 8 shows
that our method achieves the highest Kendall rank correlation coefficient (τ ) while demonstrating massive
efficiency gains—completely avoiding the O(N 2 ) global attention explosion seen in NG-T and achieving the
fastest inference latency. These results validate the effectiveness and scalability of the DNG framework in
handling complex Transformer architectures.


Table 8: Performance and efficiency comparison for the Transformer generalization prediction task (∼0.25M
Params).
                 Method                    Kendall’s τ    GFLOPs   Peak Mem (MB)    Latency (ms)
                 NG-GNN                   0.8844±0.006      3.22         54.49          5.94
                 NG-T                     0.8917±0.002     44.69        446.95          11.77
                 DNG-Encoder (Ours)       0.9028±0.005     0.12         25.36           4.38



G     Details of Experimental Setup

Below, we provide additional detailed explanations of the experiments outlined in Section 8.

G.1     Classify INRs with INR2JLS

G.1.1    Datasets

We applied the INR2JLS framework to classify images from the open-source MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and
CIFAR-10 datasets as proposed by Zhou et al. (2024a). The INRs in these datasets are structured as three-
layer MLPs with a hidden dimension of 32, utilizing the sine function as the activation function. These
MLPs, employing the sine activation function, are commonly known as SIRENs Sitzmann et al. (2020).
Following the strategy of splitting the datasets proposed by Zhou et al. (2024a), the datasets were split into


                                                         26
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




45,000 (MNIST, CIFAR) or 55,000 (FashionMNIST) training images, 5,000 validation images, and 10,000 test
images. The training set is augmented by training 10 additional copies of SIRENs with different initializations
for each training image, and each validation and test image has a single SIREN. Furthermore, we generate
the CIFAR-100 INRs dataset following the methodology used by Zhou et al. (2024a) for generating the
CIFAR-10 INRs dataset. Specifically, we train three-layer SIRENs with a hidden dimension of 32 for 5000
steps, employing the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 5e-5. Additionally, we also train 10 additional
copies of SIRENs with different initializations for each training image, while each image in the validation set
and test set retains a single SIREN.

G.1.2    Models

In the dynamic neural graph, the Fourier size of each node feature and edge feature is set to 128, and the
Fourier scale is 3. In the DNG-Encoder of the INR2JLS framework, both the Message Function and the
GRU have hidden dimensions of 512. In the Latent Generator, each spatial vector has a dimension of 512,
and each output latent vector has a dimension of 128.
When no image augmentation is applied, we use 49 spatial vectors to generate 49 latent vectors for the MNIST
and Fashion MNIST datasets. These latent vectors are then reshaped into a feature map with dimensions
7 × 7 × 128. For the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, 64 spatial vectors are used to generate 64 latent
vectors, which are reshaped into a feature map with dimensions 8 × 8 × 128. With image augmentation,
which includes rotation and flipping, we employ 49×6 = 294 spatial vectors to generate 294 latent vectors for
the MNIST and Fashion MNIST datasets. These vectors are reshaped into a feature map with dimensions
7 × 7 × (128 × 6) = 7 × 7 × 768. For the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, we use 64 × 6 = 384
spatial vectors to generate 384 latent vectors, which are reshaped into a feature map with dimensions
8 × 8 × (128 × 6) = 8 × 8 × 768.
For the reconstruction task, we employ two transposed convolutional layers as a decoder, both layers with
the kernel size of 4, the stride of 2, and the padding of 1 for all four datasets. The out channels of the first
transposed convolutional layer are 256, the out channels of the second transposed convolutional layer are 1
(MNIST, Fashion MNIST) or 3 (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100). The total number of parameters of the model is
5M for the MNIST and Fashion MNIST datasets and 6.1M for the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets.
For the classification task, we fix the trained DNG-Encoder and Latent Generator from the reconstruction
task and use them for generating feature maps. For the MNIST and Fashion MNIST datasets, we utilize a
classifier comprising two convolutional layers followed by a three-layer MLP. The classifier has the hidden
dimension of 256, with the dropout rate of 0.5 applied between each layer. For the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
dataset, the classifier structure maintains the same as above, except for adjusting the dropout rate between
convolutional layers to 0.2. The total parameters of the model is 5M for MNIST and Fashion MNIST, 6.7M
for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.

G.1.3    Training

For the reconstruction task, we set the training batch size to 64 and use the Adam optimizer with a learning
rate of 1e-4. The model is trained for 400,000 steps, and we apply an early stopping strategy that choosing
the model showing the best performance on the validation set, as described by Zhou et al. (2024a).
For the classification task, the training batch size is set to 128, and we use the AdamW optimizer with a
learning rate of 1e-4. The model is trained for 200,000 steps, and the early stopping strategy is also employed.

G.2     Predicting CNN Classifier

We use DNG-Encoder to generate the memory of the nodes in the last layer at the last timestamp of the input
CNNs, and then we map the memory of these nodes to a scalar value through an MLP head, representing
the test accuracy of our prediction. For DNG-Encoder, we use a multi-head Message Function introduced
in Section 5 to process the information that generates the dynamic neural graph converted from CNNs. In
the model, the hidden dimensions of the Message Function and GRU are set to 128. The dimension of each
head of the Message Function is 32. The MLP head is a three-layer MLP, and its hidden dimension is 1024.


                                                      27
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2026)




                                                                                       Augmented
                                                                                        Images



                                   DNG-Encoder                       Decoder
                                 & Latent Generator




            Figure 8: Data augmentation (rotation and flipping) for the INR2JLS framework.


We set the training batch size to 128, use Adam as the optimizer with learning rate of 1e-4, train for 200
epochs, and use early stopping.

G.3   Data augmentation for INR2JLS

Data augmentation for images often introduces various image transformations during training. This allows
the model to learn features and patterns under diverse conditions, enhancing its adaptability to input images
and improving overall model generalization. In our proposed data augmentation method for the INR2JLS
framework, we aim to enrich the feature map outputted by the DNG-encoder with a broader range of features
and patterns present in the original image. This enhancement subsequently boosts the generalization ability
of the classification model based on the feature map. Specifically, we rotate and flip the image corresponding
to each INR, generating multiple images for each INR. Our model then learns a feature map Faug with
increased channels from the given INR to reconstruct multiple images. For a given input INR, we generate
more latent vectors by defining more distinct spatial vectors to fuse with the same node memory s(tL ), and
then permute these new latent vectors to generate a feature map Faug with more channels. The rotation
and flipping of each image in the dataset essentially alter the spatial arrangement of the pixels of the image,
reflecting a same spatial arrangement of the input coordinates of each INR. After obtaining s(tL ) containing
semantic information of the INR, we use different spatial vectors to simulate various permutations of input
coordinates, and fuse them with s(tL ) in the latent space to decode the image. This process simulates the INR
use different permutations of input coordinates to output images with different pixel arrangements. While
the feature map Faug can reconstruct distinct images to some extent, they inherently encapsulate a variety
of features and patterns from these images. Consequently, the classifier can achieve better generalization
when performing classification tasks based on Faug . Figure 8 shows how to employ data augmentation in
the INR2JLS framework.
We also propose a data augmentation method of adding noise to the image to compare with the above
proposed method of rotating and flipping the image. For the method of rotating and flipping the image, we
apply five transformations on the image, including clockwise rotations of 90, 180 and 270 degrees, as well
as horizontal and vertical flips, which consistent with the settings in Section 8.1. For the method of adding
noise, we add Gaussian noise with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.06 the original image.




                                                      28
